The Animal Foundation operates Nevada’s largest open-admission animal shelter, the Lied Animal Shelter and pet adoption center, located in Las Vegas. Funded by taxpayers, grants, and individual donors, the shelter provides refuge for thousands of lost, unwanted, neglected, and abandoned animals annually.

In recent years, the Lied Animal Shelter faced significant challenges due to overcrowding, attributed to a surge in animal intake as residents in the greater Las Vegas area (Clark County) surrendered or lost their pets. Analysts believed that the 2008 recession was a major contributing factor to pet abandonment. April Corbin, writing for *Las Vegas Weekly*, reported:

> “The Las Vegas Valley has a problem with domestic animals: we have more than we seem able or willing to handle, and those without homes mostly end up at the Lied Shelter. On any given day, it may be the busiest animal holding facility in the nation. …Some blame the recession, which led to the foreclosures of more than 150,000 homes in Clark County between January 2007 and May 2014, triggering the wholesale abandonment of animals.”

In 2013, the Lied Animal Shelter took in over 40,000 abandoned or lost animals. Of these, more than 10,000 were adopted, nearly 5,000 were reunited with their owners, and over 2,500 were transferred to other facilities. However, 21,000 animals—more than half of those brought to the shelter—were euthanized. Many in Clark County were discouraged by the seemingly insurmountable problems the shelter faced.

Leaders at R&R Partners, a full-service international advertising agency headquartered in Las Vegas, believed their persuasive communication skills could help address the Animal Foundation’s challenges. R&R took on the nonprofit as a pro bono client with goals of promoting pet ownership and driving traffic to the Animal Foundation’s pet adoption website, NewPetNow.com. The agency conducted qualitative research through focus groups with R&R employees who were pet owners. They developed a strategy to frame pet adoption not about love and companionship but about pets’ many household uses (e.g., alarm system, sleeping mask, vacuum cleaner) with a tongue-in-cheek tone. The agency created an integrated communication campaign of “In-FUR-mercial” spoofs that portrayed pets as multi-purpose products for the home. Examples of the “Pet Dog” and “Pet Cat” In-FUR-mercials are available online.

After the release of the ads in early 2015, the campaign received critical acclaim from industry analysts. *ADWEEK* contributor Gabriel Beltrone stated, “The writing is sharp and funny, the acting perfectly overdone, and the voiceover as cheesy as possible—dead-on parody.” The In-FUR-mercials also received CynopsisMedia’s award for the Best 30-Second Spot.

The campaign resonated with audiences in Las Vegas and generated positive press for the Animal Foundation and the Lied Shelter, helping them achieve their goal of increasing pet adoption. The percentage of available pets adopted increased by 9.39 percent during 2015, resulting in more than 1,000 additional animals being adopted.

Leaders at R&R Partners acknowledged that the campaign also brought important benefits to the agency beyond the success and visibility of the campaign. Morale and camaraderie within the agency were enhanced, and the agency’s reputation as a responsible corporate citizen was reinforced. Sarah Catletti, an account supervisor at R&R Partners, described the benefits to the agency:

> “Welcoming the Animal Foundation to R&R Vegas’ list of clients was a great way to boost morale within the agency. The pro bono client was chosen through an employee voting system. Since the Animal Foundation was the organization that received the largest number of votes, the entire agency was invested and excited to hear about the work, even those who weren’t directly involved with the account.” 