In 2003, a research team from the Boyce Thompson Institute (BTI) for Plant Research in Ithaca, New York, published a peer-reviewed article in the prestigious academic journal *Cell*. This paper was considered a breakthrough in plant cell biology, addressing a major question in the field. The first author was postdoctoral researcher Meena Chandok, working under her supervisor, Daniel Klessig, who was the president of BTI at the time.

After Chandok left BTI for another position, other researchers in the laboratory attempted to replicate the results published in *Cell* using the same methods described in the article but were unsuccessful. Suspecting possible scientific misconduct, Klessig requested that Chandok return to the laboratory to redo her experiments and confirm the authenticity of her results; however, she declined. An institutional investigation concluded that there was "no conclusive evidence that Dr. Chandok achieved the results reported," but also found "no conclusive evidence" of misconduct or data fabrication. Subsequently, Klessig and the other co-authors retracted the article without Chandok's agreement. Chandok then sued Klessig for defamation, claiming that the retraction had significantly damaged her career and reputation within the scientific community.

Over several years in court, the case highlighted various issues in scientific research and publishing. John Travis, an editor at *Science* magazine, noted the case's alignment with the National Institutes of Health's grant policy, which encourages researchers to report concerns about possible misconduct. John Dahlberg, director of the Office of Research Integrity's Division of Investigative Oversight, suggested that the case might encourage individuals to come forward without fear of being sued for defamation. Science writer Eugenie Reich described Klessig as a "whistle-blower," while philosopher Janet Stemwedel raised questions about the collaborative responsibility of co-authors and Klessig regarding quality control for the research, asking, "If credit is shared, why isn't blame?"

In 2011, the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in New York dismissed the case. The court ruled that Klessig's statements were legally protected because they were "matters as to which the speaker [had] a legal or moral obligation" to notify the journal that his laboratory could not replicate the published results. The statements were made between "communicants who [shared] a common interest." The court found no proof of malice toward Chandok and noted that the investigation and attempts to have Chandok replicate her work left the question of scientific misconduct open. 