
                            Priming the Town Pump
                                 (Case 1012)

The mission of the National Institute for Engineering Ethics  (NIEE)  is  to
promote ethics in engineering practice  and  education.   One  component  of
NIEE  is  the  Applied  Ethics  in  Professional  Practice  (AEPP)  program,
providing free engineering  ethics  cases  for  educational  purposes.   The
following case may be reprinted if it is provided  free  of  charge  to  the
engineer or  student.   Written  permission  is  required  if  the  case  is
reprinted for resale.  For more cases and other NIEE  Products  &  Services,
contact  the  National  Institute  for  Engineering   Ethics,   Texas   Tech
University, www.niee.org..  (All reprints must contain these statements)

The Case:
Your firm worked long and hard visiting the public works engineer and  staff
in the City of Elm Grove, some 150 miles from your  office,  to  demonstrate
your interest and the firm's capabilities with regard to  the  design  of  a
new wastewater treatment plant that was expected to be announced  in  a  few
months.

You knew of this planned project because your receptionist's  brother  lives
in Elm Grove and is friendly with  one  of  the  operators  at  the  present
treatment plant.  As a result  of  that  lead,  you  assigned  one  of  your
engineers that lives the closest to Elm Grove to  attend  the  monthly  city
council meetings and spend a  little  time  getting  to  know  who  the  key
players were in the public works arena.

Once  the  project  looked  as  though  it  might  become  a  reality,   you
concentrated on making your qualifications  known.   You  realized  that  it
might be an uphill battle, since there were already two  firms  in  or  very
close to Elm Grove who had done work on public  works  design  projects  for
the city over the past five to  ten  years.   In  addition,  you  found  out
through your engineer that the public works engineer, Stan Uprite,  and  his
two project managers ran a tight ship and had  provided  excellent  services
to the community since the director had been hired some 18 years ago.

As it turned out, your firm was responsive to the SOQ for the  project,  was
short-listed  as  one  of  four  firms  (including  the  two  local  firms),
submitted a thorough and  somewhat  innovative  proposal  highlighting  your
experience in the selection of customized  treatment  plant  equipment,  and
was selected for the project.

During design of the project, your project engineer, Florence  (Flo)  Moore,
specified a series of pumps manufactured by an excellent, but little  known,
company called Excelsior  Pumps.   When  the  city's  project  manager,  Dee
Taylor, reviewed the specifications for  the  project,  she  questioned  the
cost of the pumps and  whether  the  anticipated  maintenance-free  warranty
would  actually  hold  up  under  use.   As  an  alternative,  she  strongly
recommended using a standard series of pumps manufactured in  the  adjoining
state by Pumpco, at a purchase price approximately $20,000  below  the  cost
of the Excelsior pump series.

Even though the long-term advantages and life-cycle savings  resulting  from
use of the Excelsior pumps were pointed  out  and  documented  from  several
previous projects completed by your firm, Ms.  Taylor  still  insisted  that
Pumpco should be the supplier, especially since the initial cost  was  lower
and the city was currently in a belt-tightening mode.  Since the issue  grew
to the point where  it  had  the  potential  of  damaging  the  relationship
between your firm and the city,  you  finally  decided  with  Flo  Moore  to
specific the Pumpco equipment in the bid documents.

It is now three years after completion of the  project  and  the  Elm  Grove
Gazette has just called for you on the  telephone  and  left  a  message  to
inform you that the treatment plant pumps have failed again  for  the  third
time in 11 months, and to ask what statement you would like  to  make  about
the situation.  They are especially interested in  your  comments  regarding
who was responsible for selection of the pumps.

What do you do?

Alternate Approaches and Survey Results for “Priming the  Town  Pump”  (Case
1012)
1.    Call and tell the Gazette reporter that you have  not  been  aware  of
    the problems with the pumps in Elm Grove  since  your  office  is  some
    distance away, and that you cannot comment.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  1%

2.    Call the reporter and say that the choice of pumps  was  made  by  the
    city and your firm since the initial cost was less  and  there  was  no
    information to suggest that the long term use of the pumps would  be  a
    problem.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  3%

3.    Call the Gazette reporter and tell  them  the  truth:  your  firm  had
    originally recommended  Excelsior  pumps  because  of  their  excellent
    reputation, your experience with the product,  and  their  maintenance-
    free warranty.  Nonetheless, the city’s project  manager,  Dee  Taylor,
    rejected the recommendation in favor of  the  cheaper  Pumpco  product.
    Now it appears that the difference in initial cost has more  than  been
    eaten up by maintenance costs on the Pumpco product over  the  last  11
    months.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  8%

4.    Call Dee Taylor (the city’s project manager), to  determine  what  the
    facts really are, including whether the pumps  are  just  inferior  and
    cannot  operate  efficiently  with  use,  whether  the   manufacturer’s
    recommended maintenance schedule has been adhered to, and  whether  the
    manufacturer has agreed  to  rectify  the  situation,  technically  and
    financially.  Then call the Gazette reporter  to  inform  them  of  the
    facts you have just learned.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  31%

5.    Instead of calling the reporter, call  Dee  Taylor  at  the  city  and
    strongly recommend that she go the Elm Grove Gazette  and  explain  the
    process which was used in selecting the pumps.  Tell her that the  city
    should take responsibility for the bad  pumps  because  they  had  been
    presented data about the more  costly  Excelsior  pumps  and  they  had
    decided to go with the low cost alternative.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  3%

6.    Determine from Dee Taylor if Pumpco is going to rectify  the  problem,
    then call the Gazette reporter and suggest that they contact the city’s
    public works director, Stan Uprite, for an official statement  to  that
    effect.
            Percentage of votes agreeing:  7%

7.    Call the reporter and  indicate  that  you  cannot  make  a  statement
    without looking into the matter further.  Then call the city's Director
    of Public Works, Stan Uprite, and tell him that the city should  submit
    a written statement about the situation to the Gazette, and  that  your
    legal counsel  insists  that  you  review  and  revise  the  letter  as
    necessary to accurately reflect your firm's position before the  letter
    is sent.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  13%

8.    Do not call  the  reporter.   Instead,  send  a  letter  to  the  city
    indicating what you have heard about the pump problem.  State that  you
    want to have the record clear that your firm is not at fault for having
    allowed  the  city  to   change   your   original   pump   manufacturer
    recommendations.  Indicate it is the  responsibility  of  the  city  to
    require Pumpco to honor  its  warranty,  or  if  for  some  reason  the
    warranty no longer applies, to make the required repairs and absorb the
    associated costs, chalking up the experience to a good lesson  learned.


      Percentage of votes agreeing:  4%

9.    Do not return the reporter's call.  Instead,  arrange  a  meeting  for
    you and Flo Moore with Dee Taylor (the  city’s  project  manager),  the
    public works director and the city attorney to discuss  the  situation.
    In the meeting stress that the decision was made to specify the  Pumpco
    product for what appeared to  the  city’s  representative  to  be  good
    reason at the time, and even though you did not feel it to be as good a
    product as the Excelsior pumps, you did not reject the Pumpco  product,
    since they had a decent reputation and an acceptable warranty.  Be sure
    to get an agreement that the city will not involve  your  firm  in  the
    media.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  21%

10.   Call back and tell the Gazette  reporter  to  contact  the  Elm  Grove
    Director of Public Works, Stan Uprite, for a statement.  Do  not  offer
    any information on your own.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  2%

11.   Do not  return  the  reporter's  call.   News  gets  old  rapidly  and
    reporters have story deadlines to meet.  They are  only  interested  in
    getting statements from people as  soon  as  possible  and  are  rarely
    willing to wait a few  days  or  more.   Besides,  by  talking  to  the
    reporter, you run the risk that they may not understand  the  technical
    details and will end up  misquoting  you  or  using  portions  of  your
    statement out of context (you never get a chance to review and edit the
    material before it is printed).
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  1%


Forum Comments from Respondents
1.    If the city avoids addressing the question and I  am  contacted  again
    by the Elm Grove Gazette, I would tell them the exact process  used  in
    selecting the pumps, including the belt tightening mode of the city  at
    the time the decision was made.  I would not BLAME anyone; I would just
    state what I had recommended and why the cheaper pumps were selected by
    the city.  I probably would not work in  Elm  Grove  again,  but  worse
    things have happened.

2.    "Recall" that the selection of the pumps was an "economy" item at  the
    time.  Don't overtly shift the blame on the city.   Let  the  newspaper
    draw that  conclusion  themselves  and  be  relieved  that  you  aren't
    pressing the point.

3.    I would answer any  direct  questions  the  reporter  asks  about  our
    firm's involvement with the city's pumps, but I would seek the approval
    of our firm's lawyers before issuing any statements to the press.

4.    Remember that you are not obliged to talk to the  press.   Your  first
    obligation  is  to  the  client  -  the  newspaper  story  is  probably
    inaccurate or incomplete.  If you were  to  respond  to  the  Gazette's
    inquiry, you would probably be misquoted or your answer  taken  out  of
    context.  Refer them back to the client's representative at the city.

5.    It is highly unlikely that more than one pump would fail at one  time,
    which probably means that the system would not shut down completely and
    that a temporary pump could be set up quickly until the failed pump was
    repaired or replaced.  (In fact, the plant should have been designed to
    provide for a  single  pump  failure.)   Thus,  the  issue  is  one  of
    inconvenience vs. failure and environmental incident.  I would  explain
    this reasoning to the Gazette reporter and tell them  that  the  higher
    cost (quality?) pumps were originally selected by my firm but,  because
    the city was looking to cut costs, you, jointly with the  city  project
    manager, chose to go  with  a  lower  cost  pump  realizing  that  this
    decision imposed some risk.

6.    Selection of the pump is a dead issue.  As  the  design  engineer  you
    agreed to the city's request and therefore bought  into  the  decision.
    You should contact Dee Taylor to determine  the  exact  status  of  the
    pumps and then contact Pumpco to discuss their next action  to  rectify
    the situation.  Also discuss with the  city  your  desire  to  see  the
    situation rectified and suggest an  engineering  contract  to  fix  the
    problem or replace the pumps.  The city knows who requested these pumps
    and to keep pushing the issue is detrimental to  the  relationship  and
    the ultimate fix.

7.    Call the reporter and indicate that you need to investigate the  story
    further before you can make a statement.  Schedule a meeting  with  Flo
    Moore, Dee Taylor, Stan  Uprite  and  possibly  a  representative  from
    Pumpco.  Focus on how the problem is to be solved.   If  Pumpco  admits
    fault but believes they can rectify the situation, agree  to  give  the
    Gazette a statement pointing  out  how  Pumpco  is  standing  by  their
    product , and the  problem  will  be  resolved.   If  Pumpco  does  not
    cooperate and your company can afford to "eat" some costs, offer to pay
    part or all of the cost to convert to Excelsior pumps.  Try to work out
    a deal with Excelsior to give the pumps  for  a  special  one-time  buy
    emphasizing the potential for your future business with them.  Give the
    Gazette a statement that the pumps are being replaced by  your  company
    (and the city) with a more expensive Excelsior pump that  may  hold  up
    better for the city's particular application.

8.    You should call the reporter (avoiding her call will look  as  if  you
    are avoiding the situation and have something to hide)  and  tell  them
    you can't respond to their questions at this time because  you  do  not
    have all of the facts.  Meet with the city to determine  the  facts  in
    the case and  quietly  remind  the  city  of  your  role  in  the  pump
    purchasing decision.  Then develop a  public  relations  strategy  with
    Stan Uprite.  The city should be the  party  to  communicate  with  the
    media,  but  probably  through  jointly-developed   statements.    This
    approach addresses the important concerns  of  figuring  out  what  the
    problem is and resolving it, not deceiving the news media  (and,  thus,
    the public), and preserving your working relationship with the city.

9.    Do not return  the  reporter's  call.   Before  acting,  advise  those
    concerned  within  your  firm  of  the  potential  PR  problems,  while
    verifying adequate documentation of the company's  position  about  the
    choice of pumps.  As soon as  the  appropriate  personnel  within  your
    company are up to speed, approach the city's project manager (do not go
    over  anyone's  head)  and  offer,  as  a  goodwill  gesture,  to  help
    investigate the implementation of a solution to the crisis.   Tactfully
    remind the city of your company's  position  regarding  the  choice  of
    pumps, while avoiding saying "I told you so."  The  focus  must  be  on
    solving the problem.  If the problem is faulty  equipment,  assist  the
    city in  obtaining  satisfaction  from  the  pump  manufacturer.   Your
    company is clearly not responsible for the problem, so there is  plenty
    of room to be magnanimous and try to deliver total quality  service  to
    the customer.

10.   If at all possible, the media should be  avoided  altogether.   Having
    this story published will hurt someone's credibility.  A  very  similar
    situation came up in my hometown with the pump on the city fire  truck,
    and soon everyone was angry at each other.  While this is a  matter  of
    public record and interest, it won't hurt anyone if  it  does  not  get
    published.  If put off long enough, the Gazette will soon get tired  of
    chasing the story.

11.   All too often there is a tendency for  the  engineer  (and  others  as
    well) to protect him/herself and the firm by  telling  the  truth,  but
    taken out of context of the situation, in order to turn  the  focus  on
    someone else.  Although there  is  certainly  nothing  unethical  about
    telling the truth, it is important to determine  whether  the  item  of
    truth is germane to the issue at  hand  or  is  merely  a  self-serving
    device to avoid responsibility or involvement in solving the situation.

