
                               When in Rome…..
                                 (Case 1021)

The mission of the National Institute for Engineering Ethics  (NIEE)  is  to
promote ethics in engineering practice  and  education.   One  component  of
NIEE  is  the  Applied  Ethics  in  Professional  Practice  (AEPP)  program,
providing free engineering  ethics  cases  for  educational  purposes.   The
following case may be reprinted if it is provided  free  of  charge  to  the
engineer or  student.   Written  permission  is  required  if  the  case  is
reprinted for resale.  For more cases and other NIEE  Products  &  Services,
contact  the  National  Institute  for  Engineering   Ethics,   Texas   Tech
University, www.niee.org..  (All reprints must contain these statements)

The Case:
Your firm, Choice Engineering, Inc.,  is  a  multi-disciplinary  engineering
firm operating in the Rocky Mountain area for the past 35 years.  The  types
of projects it has designed over  the  years  range  from  high-rise  office
buildings to  hydroelectric  dams  to  petroleum  refineries.   One  of  the
features of the firm is that all of  the  required  engineering  disciplines
(such   as   electrical,   mechanical,   industrial,   chemical,    process,
environmental, civil and others) are housed within the  one  company.   This
has  historically  enabled  Choice  Engineering  to  compete  for   projects
effectively, since all the necessary disciplines for a project  are  managed
in-house, and there is close control over project costs.  As a  result,  the
company has gained a reputation for completing project designs on  time  and
well within budget, which has brought clients to the door with  very  little
marketing effort.

In recent years, however, Choice has felt  the  impact  of  several  smaller
firms who tend to band together on a project-by-project basis, depending  on
the expertise  required.   Most  of  these  firms  are  quite  small,  their
overhead expenses are minimal (many work out of their  attics  or  garages),
and only have three or four  highly  trained  people  in  the  firm.   These
coalitions have been successful in  being  awarded  design  contracts  which
Choice traditionally handled.  As  a  result,  the  company  is  faced  with
either divesting  themselves  of  several  areas  of  engineering  expertise
involving more than 200 employees, or taking their  existing  structure  and
project approach to new geographic markets.

The company is not willing to hire an outside marketing expert.   They  tend
to be expensive, and there is a lot of time, effort and  money  involved  in
getting them to the point where  they  understand  what  your  company  does
before being able to identify new markets, let  alone  obtain  new  clients.
As it turns out, you are  the  only  person  in  the  company's  engineering
management that has both a degree in engineering and a degree  in  economics
and business administration.  You are therefore assigned a new  position  in
the  company  to  develop  one  or  more  new  client  areas.   If  you  are
successful, you will save the jobs of more than a couple hundred  people  in
the company.  If you are unsuccessful………………..!

After reading Time and Newsweek, you find  that  there  has  been  a  recent
discovery of an previously unknown productive oil field in  a  little-heard-
of country, Utopia.  You go there to see if you can sell  the  directors  of
the petroleum combine, Obigee Oil Unlimited, on  hiring  Choice  Engineering
to design a new petrochemical facility for them, so they can  keep  some  of
the oil production in Utopia, and realize greater  income  and  profit  from
the products to be manufactured by the proposed petrochemical  plant.    You
made several presentations to the Obigee directors and  have  just  received
word that Obigee  is  now  going  to  develop  a  very  large  petrochemical
manufacturing plant in the Utopian Hills.

Elated that you had done such an outstanding job selling them the idea,  you
contact one of the directors of Obigee, only to find that he  and  the  rest
of the board are convinced the idea  came  from  their  Board  of  Directors
chairman's brother-in-law.  When you suggest that Choice  Engineering  would
like to design the project (preferably on  a  sole  source,  non-competitive
basis), you are told that there are rules about  how  business  is  done  in
Utopia, and that you must follow those rules.

After spending some time researching the issues, you find that in  order  to
do business as a foreign company in Utopia, it is necessary to have a  local
presence in the country to represent your interests.  This  seems  to  be  a
reasonable approach, so you contact  a  firm  recommended  to  you  by  your
secretary's uncle, Hugh Rodman, who is  from  Utopia,  called  International
Affiliates Ltd.  Uncle Hugh says they do good engineering work  there.   Mr.
Owatadeel,  president  of  International  Affiliates,  tells  you  that   he
graduated from MIT several years ago and will be pleased to  act  as  Choice
Engineering's associate firm in Utopia.  As such, they will make all of  the
necessary contacts with Obigee's directors and project management,  as  well
as important government regulatory officials.  They  will  make  the  proper
introductions, assist in a preparing the budget for the petrochemical  plant
design, and secure the necessary permits when  the  project  is  awarded  to
Choice, as is certain to happen if International Affiliates is part  of  the
team.  When asked how many people are in International Affiliates, he  tells
you there are four, including a brother, nephew and  his  wife  who  runs  a
variety of errands from time to time.

Owatadeel has now sent you an email indicating that his fee for  setting  up
the project on his books is US$50,000 as a retainer to  start.   Thereafter,
he will charge US$300 per hour while he and his associates  work  to  obtain
the design contract from Obigee, and an additional allowance should be  made
for up to US$250,000 for presentations, trips and other marketing gifts  for
two or three key Obigee directors.  When you add all this up, it amounts  to
about 28% of your anticipated profit for the  entire  plant  design,  should
you be awarded the project.  Owatadeel also tells  you  that  several  other
international design companies have now contacted him to act as their  local
associate for this project, and he knows of at least  four  other  companies
similar to his in the same city who have also  been  approached  by  several
design companies.  He says that this is the way  business  is  done  in  his
country, and all of these other firms have done work in  Utopia  previously.
He concludes by suggesting that you contact him within  the  next  24  hours
and authorize his exclusive  involvement  with  Choice  for  obtaining  this
project.

After reading his email for the fourth time, you realize  that  you  have  a
decision to make, and quickly.

What do you decide to do?

Alternate Approaches and Survey Results for “When in Rome…” (Case 1021)
1.    Quickly check with some other US and foreign companies doing  business
    in Utopia to see if the arrangement proposed by Owatadeel is typical of
    the way business is conducted there.  If so, enter  into  an  agreement
    with Owatadeel to be your firm’s representative, with the specific goal
    of obtaining the contract for the design of the proposed  petrochemical
    plant.  Your company needs the work, and you need the success!
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  7%

2.    Immediately tell the  president  of  Choice  Engineering  what  you’ve
    learned about  business  practices  in  Utopia  and  about  Owatadeel’s
    proposal.  Let him decide if the firm will invest in this new  venture.
    If so, he should also decide the amount of  money  to  be  spent  using
    International Affiliates Ltd. to procure the contract.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  22%

3.    Get back to Owatadeel and try to negotiate a smaller fee with him  for
    his proposed services.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  8%

4.    Try to find another Utopian company to work with  for  a  smaller  fee
    for the same scope of services outlined by Owatadeel.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  5%

5.    The potential fees and profit for this contract are too  large  to  be
    ignored.  Decline Owatadeel’s offer and  instead  set  up  and  fund  a
    branch office of your company in the capital of Utopia near the  Obigee
    headquarters.  You can send one of your subordinates to  act  as  point
    person, with the initial objective of obtaining the  contract  for  the
    design of the proposed petrochemical plant.  Once the  design  contract
    is secured, you can  use  that  office  as  the  local  project  design
    headquarters.  While the cost of an office is not overly expensive, you
    do recognize that a good portion of the amount Owatadeel indicated  was
    needed for presentations, trips and marketing gifts  will  have  to  be
    distributed in the process, in accordance with the customs of Utopia.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  16%

6.    Recognizing that  there  is  a  US  government  regulation  which  may
    prohibit proffering money or items of value in exchange  for  obtaining
    contracts and work from foreign countries,  you  decide  to  comply  by
    setting your secretary’s  Uncle  Hugh  up  in  business  as  a  totally
    separate company in Utopia through an arm’s length arrangement in which
    you and several of the principals in your firm fund the cost of  Hugh’s
    office from  your  personal  bank  accounts.   Once  Hugh  obtains  the
    petrochemical plant design contract, he can then turn around  and  hire
    your company as a subconsultant to him to do the design work.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  3%

7.    One of your company’s competitors, ArsenalChem, has  its  headquarters
    in the same city as Choice Engineers, and provides  the  same  sort  of
    consulting and design services as  your  firm.   Instead  of  accepting
    Owatadeel’s proposal, you decide to have dinner with a  friend  who  is
    marketing director for  ArsenalChem  and  tell  her  about  the  Utopia
    chemical plant opportunity.  You are even willing to put her  in  touch
    with Owatadeel.  If ArsenalChem decides to go after the Utopia project,
    you will be in an excellent position to pick up opportunities  for  the
    domestic projects ArsenalChem won’t have time to chase.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  5%

8.    You find in a copy of the National Society of  Professional  Engineers
    (NSPE)   Code   of   Ethics   for   Engineers   (Section   II.5.b    at
    www.nspe.org/ethics) that professional engineers shall  not  offer  any
    gift or other valuable consideration in order to secure work, and shall
    not pay a commission, percentage, or brokerage fee in order  to  secure
    work,  except  to  a  bona  fide  employee  or  bona  fide  established
    commercial or marketing agencies retained by them.  While  you  believe
    this only applies to  professional  engineers  (those  with  registered
    professional engineering licenses) in the United States, you decide not
    to take a chance  with  Owatadeel  in  Utopia,  and  recommend  to  the
    president of Choice Engineering that the company ‘downsize’  by  laying
    off the projected 200 or so employees as the work dries up in the  near
    future.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  10%

9.    Because of the clause  in  the  NSPE  Code  of  Ethics  for  Engineers
    indicated in the alternate solution above, you recommend to the  Choice
    Engineering Board of Directors that they  do  not  pursue  the  Utopian
    contract, but rather set up a branch office in Alaska, in  anticipation
    of new drilling in the Arctic National  Wildlife  Preserve  which  will
    require the services your firm can provide for  ecologically  sensitive
    plant development designs, even though it may take 12 to 18  months  of
    stiff  competition  to  develop  that  work  with  the  large  domestic
    petrochemical companies.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  19%

10.   You do not believe the NSPE Code is applicable to engineers  operating
    in other countries since ethics  standards  are  relative  to  specific
    countries and change from country to country. The profit to be made  on
    the Utopia plant design is very large once the  contract  is  obtained.
    This is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity for the right person, and  you
    have personally been instrumental  in  making  the  right  contacts  in
    Utopia and convincing Obigee to build an expanded petrochemical  plant.
    As a result, you decide to resign from Choice Engineering and  move  to
    Utopia to promote the plant design  on  your  own,  as  an  engineering
    broker.  You plan to take two of Choice’s engineers and estimators with
    you to do the detailed cost estimating.   Once you  have  obtained  the
    contract from the Obigee directors,  you  will  be  in  a  position  to
    subcontract with Choice Engineering, ArsenalChem or others  to  do  the
    actual engineering design, depending on the deal they  are  willing  to
    work out with you for obtaining the work.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  1%

11.   You understand the limits of your marketing capabilities, as  well  as
    the awesome responsibility of providing sufficient on-going new work to
    feed the 200 employees who might be fired.  You resign from the company
    and recommend to the president of Choice Engineering that they use your
    salary to hire a true marketer (marketeer) to obtain  new  work.   This
    then allows you to open the antique auto shop you  have  always  wanted
    to, realizing that you may have to have your wife go to work to support
    the rest of the family.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  3%


Forum Comments from Respondents

Student responses:
1.    If I couldn’t negotiate a lower  fee  for  Obigee,  I  would  research
    means of setting up  a  branch  office  in  Utopia,  including  a  cost
    analysis, time to set up and any other factors that may come into play.
     With this information in hand I would present however much of it I can
    obtain in12 hours to the president of the company.   By  only  using  a
    couple of hours, this will leave time for a decision to be made by  the
    president as to how the situation should be approached.

2.    You were assigned a new position in the  company  to  develop  one  or
    more  new  client  areas,   therefore   Approach   #2   in   the   only
    possible/plausible approach.  You “developed”  a  new  client  for  the
    principals of the parent company to follow-up on.

3.    After searching  for  other  firms  in  Utopia  that  operate  without
    charging large fees, I would set up a branch office  in  an  effort  to
    secure the contract and save the 200 employee jobs.  I would also write
    up a proposal to Choice  Engineering  management  on  the  benefits  of
    hiring a professional marketer for securing future work.

4.    I would try to find other ways of securing the project with  Owatadeel
    instead of giving gifts (or bribes).  If he was unwilling to  cooperate
    then I would continue searching and competing for  other  jobs  that  I
    could ethically participate in and allow my company  to  be  successful
    even though  it  may  be  more  competitive  and  difficult.   A  clear
    conscience is priceless.

5.    I think that signing  the  contract  with  Owatadeel  is  beyond  your
    authority and you should consult  the  president  of  the  company  and
    follow through with his decision.  You don’t have  the  experience  and
    knowledge to handle the matter.

Practicing engineer responses:
6.    This modus operandi is  not  uncommon  in  foreign  countries  and  is
    considered a cost of doing business.  If you can get a delay in dealing
    with Owatadeel, you can explore the possibility of another partner.  It
    sounds like you may not have done your homework thoroughly.

7.    Your company has been resting on its laurels and has gotten caught  by
    market conditions.  The senior managers  are  probably  not  known  for
    their foresightedness or  they  would  have  seen  the  change  in  the
    marketplace.  As a result, they may not have researched doing  business
    in a foreign country and the risks  involved,  e.g.,  foreign  currency
    conversion, taxes, understanding the culture, labor situation,  receipt
    of payment for services rendered, etc.  The US State Department  should
    have been contacted to gain insight on doing business in Utopia.

8.    You have been stiffed once by the directors of  Obigee  Oil  regarding
    the building of  the  petrochemical  complex.   Owatadeel  is  probably
    expecting you to negotiate because it is a  custom  of  doing  business
    there.  You must be careful because these people may not be trusted  at
    their word.

9.    You should ask Owatadeel for the names of two European  or  US  client
    references  and  offer  to  meet  with  him  if  he  will  arrange  and
    participate in an introductory meeting  with  the  “key”  officials  at
    Obigee Oil within the next week.  Tell Owatadeel  that  based  on  your
    assessment of the value of the meeting,  you  will  decide  whether  to
    consider further to engage his firm (International Associates - IA) for
    the project.  If your  decision  is  favorable,  you  will  enter  into
    negotiations with IA to identify a mutually acceptable  scope  of  work
    and pricing/payment arrangement for their services.  Upon reaching  and
    signing the agreement, you will arrange for an electronic transfer of a
    project initiation fee of US$30k.   Failing  to  agree  to  engage  the
    services of IA, you will  pay  IA  a  fee  of  US$10k  for  Owatadeel’s
    assistance in meeting with  at  least  two  members  of  the  Board  of
    Directors and the Project Manager at Obigee Oil.

10.   If award of this contract would keep 200 people busy and  the  company
    is feeling paternal towards them, take the  deal  with  Owatadeel.   It
    could be viewed as “social engineering” by keeping the people  employed
    or it could be a means of learning how to  do  business  in  a  foreign
    country.  The expectation would be that of a learning  experience  with
    little profit realized, but a large gain in experience.

11.   Choice Engineering is faced with a serious problem.  Most  engineering
    codes of ethics address this issue very clearly.  For example, the NSPE
    code states, “Engineers shall not permit  the  use  of  their  name  or
    associate in business ventures with  any  person  or  firm  which  they
    believe is engaged in fraudulent  or  dishonest  enterprise”  (II.1.d).
    Also, “Engineers shall not  offer,  give,  solicit  or  receive  either
    directly or indirectly, any contribution to influence the  award  of  a
    contract by public authority, or which may reasonably be  construed  by
    the public as having the effect or intent of influencing the award of a
    contract” (II.5.b).  While one might take the position that the project
    is for a private company and not a public  agency,  and  therefore  the
    code does not apply  in  this  situation,  this  is  not  a  reasonable
    conclusion.  Therefore, since Choice Engineering is operating under the
    code of ethics in the United States, it must decline being involved.

12.    The  arrangement  proposed  by  International  Associates  is  widely
    accepted in many foreign countries.  These countries have  a  different
    culture and code of ethics.  The question is should Choice  Engineering
    abide by the code of ethics in the country where they are headquartered
    (USA) or by the code and operating  procedures  where  the  project  is
    located.  A strict interpretation would say Choice has no choice but to
    conform to the  United  States  code  and  decline  to  associate  with
    International Associates.  On the other hand, it could be  argued  that
    Choice should follow the customs and procedures of  the  country  where
    the project is located, probably the only rationale to be taken if they
    wish to secure work in many foreign countries.  In that case, if Choice
    is satisfied they will receive equable  services  for  the  fees  being
    charged by IA, then the arrangement is acceptable.

13.   Don’t walk away from the deal offered by International  Associates…run
    away from it! With the most lenient interpretation  of  the  case,  the
    US$250,000 is a gratuity and Cannon 5a  of  the  ASCE  Code  of  Ethics
    prohibits giving gratuities to get work.  While IA is going to  do  the
    actual giving of these “marketing gifts”, they will be acting  as  your
    agent.  You are responsible for the actions of your agent and you  know
    this arrangement with IA is wrong.

14.   Don’t feel like you have  to  “save  the  firm”  on  your  own.   This
    feeling is the only thing urging you to do  something  you  know  isn’t
    ethical  or  good  business.   Due  to  the  shortsightedness  of   the
    principals in Choice  Engineering,  you  were  placed  in  a  marketing
    position for  which  you  had  no  experience.   Cut  your  losses  and
    recommend to the Choice principals that they cut theirs.  Either obtain
    experienced marketing help and try other ventures or downsize.

15.   You should suggest to the president  of  Choice  Engineering  that  he
    urge NSPE to start a well-publicized internet web site devoted to  such
    regional problems as these which are increasingly important in a  world
    market.  This would allow individuals and firms in  the  United  States
    and abroad to contribute their varied experiences, share  concepts  and
    educate the rest of the profession.

