
                             Santa in the Summer
                                 (Case 1024)

The mission of the National Institute for Engineering Ethics  (NIEE)  is  to
promote ethics in engineering practice  and  education.   One  component  of
NIEE  is  the  Applied  Ethics  in  Professional  Practice  (AEPP)  program,
providing free engineering  ethics  cases  for  educational  purposes.   The
following case may be reprinted if it is provided  free  of  charge  to  the
engineer or  student.   Written  permission  is  required  if  the  case  is
reprinted for resale.  For more cases and other NIEE  Products  &  Services,
contact  the  National  Institute  for  Engineering   Ethics,   Texas   Tech
University, www.niee.org..  (All reprints must contain these statements)

The Case:
Rod Traverse is a civil engineering student at a  well-known  university  in
the mid-west.  Because he did  well  in  his  surveying  course  during  his
junior year, he is working for the summer before his  senior  year  for  the
state Department of Transportation (DOT) on a road construction project  140
miles from his hometown.   His  duties  include  working  closely  with  the
state's on-site resident engineer, Jim  Upwright  and  several  other  state
highway construction engineers for the project.  Ethel Hicks (known  to  her
friends as “Eth”) is Upwright’s  supervisor  at  the  DOT  headquarters  and
visits  the  site  every  couple  of  weeks  to  see  how  the  project   is
progressing.

Every Friday afternoon about 4:00 p.m., Rod and the DOT engineers  get  into
their cars or trucks to drive home for the weekend.  Since he works  a  good
bit of the time reducing survey data and  keeping  records  in  the  state's
construction trailer, Rod has  noticed  individual  foremen  for  the  three
separate bridge contractors working on the project putting a  box  or  other
article in the back of the resident engineer's pickup truck about 3:30  p.m.
on most Fridays. These boxes and articles have included a new set of  tires,
a mountain bike, a case of Duggan's Dew  o’  Kirkintilloch  Scotch  whiskey,
and a shotgun.

There are several more bridge structures to  be  designed  and  built  under
another contract for the project.  Upwright will be asked to  make  comments
and give recommendations regarding the three  bridge  contractors  presently
on the project, if they show interest in obtaining the additional work.

Since Rod's  work  is  part  of  a  summer  credit  course  program  at  the
university, Upwright  will  also  be  required  to  communicate  with  Rod's
advisor at school (Dr. R. E. Serchur) and  recommend  an  appropriate  grade
for Rod’s summer work course.

Under the circumstances, is Rod obligated to say anything  about  the  gifts
to anyone, and if so, to whom and when?

Alternate Approaches and Survey Results for  “Santa  in  the  Summer”  (Case
1024)
1.    Rod is only a summer hire and should keep his nose out of things  that
    are none of his business.  He has heard that things like this happen on
    some construction projects.  The last thing he wants is  to  jeopardize
    his chances for a good grade in the summer  work  course,  which  could
    impact his job opportunities the following spring when he graduates.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 2%

2.    Rod should contact his  faculty  advisor,  R.  E.  Serchur,  over  the
    weekend and ask for his advice about the  most  appropriate  course  of
    action, if any, he should take.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 45%

3.    Rod should approach one of the bridge contractor  foremen  to  try  to
    clarify the facts of the situation  through  them,  before  confronting
    Upwright (perhaps the items in  the  pickup  truck  were  intended  for
    charity or they may be  purchasing  items  that  Upwright  wants  at  a
    discount and Upwright is reimbursing them for the cost of each item).
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 14%

4.    Rod should send an anonymous letter to  “Eth”  Hicks  in  guise  of  a
    taxpayer who frequently observes things on the project, and  has  noted
    the apparent transfer of gifts from contractor personnel  to  a  pickup
    truck  with  a  license  plate  number  that  coincides  with  that  of
    Upwright’s pickup.  The letter should suggest that these actions appear
    improper and should be looked into.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 4%

5.    Rod should discretely inquire  of  someone  in  the  DOT  who  is  not
    connected with the project what the  policy  is  with  respect  to  DOT
    personnel accepting gifts from  contractors.   If  it  is  against  DOT
    policy, then Rod should blow the whistle to “Eth” Hicks.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 10%

6.    Rod should ask Upwright directly about what has  transpired  with  the
    contractors’ foremen and  explain  that  while  nothing  wrong  may  be
    occurring, the appearance of impropriety exists to the casual observer.


      Percentage of votes agreeing: 22%

7.    Rod should approach one of the contractor’s foremen  and  mention  how
    nice it would be to have a Bose Lifestyle 20 sound system to put in his
    fraternity room during the ensuing college year.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 1%

8.    Rod should photograph the Friday gifts for a  few  weeks  with  dates,
    times and the license plate on Upwright’s pickup clearly  visible.   He
    should show Upwright copies of these photos, emphasizing how  practical
    Rod’s summer job is, then suggest that his efforts surely deserve an  A
    grade and a glowing recommendation for his university file.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 2%

9.     Rod  has  no  control  over  the  situation.   He  should  leave  the
    construction project as soon as possible and take an incomplete in  the
    summer work course, so that  he  won’t  be  included  as  part  of  the
    situation should anything happen (someone blows the whistle) before the
    summer has ended.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 0%

Forum Comments from Respondents
Comments from students:
1.    Something needs to be done, but Rob should first discuss the  incident
    with his faculty advisor so as to place his grade in a better  position
    if things turn ugly.  Then he should put out a ‘feeler’ as described in
    #5, and evaluate his final decision based on the response received.  If
    it is against policy, he should report it to “Eth”; if it  is  not,  he
    would  only  be  exposing  himself  to  crossfire  while  accomplishing
    nothing, and should let the issue drop (though I  still  disagree  with
    such a practice occurring).

2.    Rod should talk with Upwright about what he  has  seen  and  indicates
    that it at least appears to be improper.  If he then determines that it
    is wrong, he  should  express  his  disappointment  as  an  engineering
    student at the bad example being set for him, although I don’t think  I
    would blow the whistle.

3.    Because Rob is only summer help, he needs to be careful about  how  he
    handles the situation.  I have found that it is often helpful  to  seek
    council and guidance from someone with a lot of  experience.   That  is
    why he should talk with his faculty adviser.  He will help steer him in
    the right direction, and give him the courage to do what is right.

4.    If his faulty advisor is a professional engineer, he should have  some
    good advice for him.

Comments from practicing engineers:
1.    Rod  needs  to  consult  with  one  or  two  of  the  other  assistant
    engineers, preferably those who are candid and  will  tell  the  truth.
    Presuming they all agree that the situation does not  look  good,  they
    need to approach the Resident Engineer  as  a  team  and  lay  out  the
    problem to him as soon as possible.  Rod should not try  to  solve  the
    problem on his own because this sort of thing is not easily solved  one
    on one.

      If Rod finds the whole system is  corrupt,  it  is  still  beyond  his
    control to solve it and he needs to go to the ethics ombudsman  in  the
    state government and seek advice from them.  For good measure, he needs
    to discuss his perception of the problem with his faculty advisor.

      (I was in a very similar situation when I started working as a  recent
    graduate for a state DOT.  I wish now I had followed my own suggestions
    then.)

2.    I can envision a situation where this young man might be somewhat  (or
    perhaps terribly) disillusioned about the profession he  has  selected.
    If he’s a sensitive soul, he might even seek  out  a  personal  meeting
    with his advisor and ask if all engineers are expected  to  sell  their
    souls for a “mess of pottage.”

3.    One wonders what the Resident Engineer is  doing  in  return  for  the
    gifts.  Perhaps he has the concrete testing technician pulling all  his
    sets of cylinders from the first truck of the day and ignoring all  the
    others (by leaving the site early?).  Or  allowing  the  contractor  to
    place the  subgrade  in  excessively  thick  lifts.   Or  allowing  the
    subgrade  material  to  contain  excessive  amounts  of  organics.   Or
    allowing a substantial number of the required rock bolts in a rock  cut
    to be shorter than the length called for in the project specifications.
     Or  making  “corrections”  to  the  calculated  yardage  so  carefully
    calculated by the student engineer.

4.    Rod has  found  himself  in  a  pickle.   State  employees  are  in  a
    particularly bright public light and most cannot accept any gift.  Some
    cannot even accept lunch.  Is Rod “obligated” to do  something?   Is  a
    witness to a bank robbery ”obligated” to report what s/he has seen?  If
    Rod ignores the rather obvious graft, he jeopardizes his reputation and
    his ability to discern right from wrong while  facing  himself  in  the
    mirror every morning.  His course of action is clearly  to  confide  in
    his resident engineer’s  supervisor,  Eth  Hicks.   He  should  clearly
    document what he has seen and then set a meeting with  her  to  discuss
    what he has seen.  The worst that can happen to Rod is that he fails to
    get credit for the course; with any luck, though, the  faculty  advisor
    will understand the situation and speak to  Ms  Hicks  instead  of  the
    Resident Engineer for a recommendation regarding  Rod’s  grade  in  the
    course.  Otherwise, if the DOT fails to back up Rod, he has  learned  a
    very valuable lesson.  He doesn’t want to work there anyway!

      Should that actually happen, he should document what he has  seen  and
    send it to the State’s  governmental  oversight  agency  and  let  them
    investigate.  After all, it’s tax dollars that are being put  at  risk,
    not to mention the integrity of the system, and the livelihoods of many
    other firms unfairly cut out of competition for future work.

