
                              What's the Angle?
                                 (Case 1010)

The mission of the National Institute for Engineering Ethics  (NIEE)  is  to
promote ethics in engineering practice  and  education.   One  component  of
NIEE  is  the  Applied  Ethics  in  Professional  Practice  (AEPP)  program,
providing free engineering  ethics  cases  for  educational  purposes.   The
following case may be reprinted if it is provided  free  of  charge  to  the
engineer or  student.   Written  permission  is  required  if  the  case  is
reprinted for resale.  For more cases and other NIEE  Products  &  Services,
contact  the  National  Institute  for  Engineering   Ethics,   Texas   Tech
University, www.niee.org..  (All reprints must contain these statements)

The Case:
Julie Adams is the sole proprietor of a small,  but  successful,  structural
engineering firm in a large, older city in the Midwest.  Her success is  the
result of a  lot  of  hard  work  for  more  than  ten  years,  as  well  as
establishing excellent relations with her clients.   One  of  the  specialty
areas that has evolved in her practice has  been  the  renovation  of  major
historic commercial buildings, many in the downtown  financial  district  of
the city.

Julie has been asked to do a structural survey of the  Inverness  Block,  an
old, well-recognized, seven-story granite-faced building  in  the  financial
district close to several other buildings which her  firm  has  investigated
for renovations in the past.  One of her largest clients, Charles A.  Smith,
is in the final stages of negotiations to sell  the  Inverness  Block  to  a
group of foreign investors represented by Sam Goldworthy, a local  attorney.
 This sale is very important  to  Smith  because  it  is  the  last  of  his
properties to be put on the market, and represents  the  liquid  capital  he
needs to retire to a 30-acre estate he has acquired on Grand Cayman  Island,
where there is a most advantageous tax structure.

In order to wrap up some of the final  details  and  firm  up  the  purchase
price (which at present is quite generous), Sam Goldworthy has  requested  a
structural survey of specific  building  elements,  including  the  outdated
window casements, among  others.   Mr.  Smith  agrees  to  have  the  survey
completed, and negotiates a fair price with Julie  Adams  to  do  the  work.
They sign an  agreement  which  contains  Smith’s  usual  clause  that  “all
information discovered by the engineer shall  become  the  property  of  the
client (Smith) and shall not be released  to  others  without  the  client’s
express written consent.”

Since Julie is personally tied up with overseeing several structural  design
projects and she understands that the results of  the  proposed  survey  are
crucial to completing the purchase negotiations for the building before  the
established  deadline,  she  assigns  Brock  Williams,  one  of   her   most
experienced  structural  engineers,  to  proceed  with  the  survey  of  the
Inverness Block.  Brock proceeds immediately, covers all  of  the  workscope
items required, except for inspection of  the  window  casements,  which  he
saves until last.

When he gets to the window casements, they appear to be in excellent  shape.
  However,  since  there  is  so  much  money  involved  in   the   purchase
negotiations, he decides to dismantle three units at  random  for  a  better
determination.  With permission from Mr. Smith, Brock  carefully  dismantles
one of the units and uses a flashlight to look into the wall cavity  to  see
how the windows are attached.  A steel strap for anchoring  the  windows  is
clearly visible in the uncovered space.

As he is about to replace the dismantled window  unit,  Brock  notices  that
the three-inch exterior granite veneer is attached to the building  by  clip
angles welded to the steel building frame, typical of an  early  example  of
stone-cladding on steel-frame construction.  In the beam of the  flashlight,
the clip angle within reach appears to be rusted.  Curious as to the  extent
of this apparent corrosion, Brock reaches into the space,  grasps  the  clip
angle and, to his horror, finds that it breaks off in his hand  without  any
significant pressure.  Looking closer at the fracture,  he  determines  that
the clip is rusted virtually through the entire cross section.

Immediately the implication of his discovery dawns on Brock, since  if  this
condition is typical throughout the building,  the  cost  of  repairs  could
approach the  value  of  the  building  itself.   As  he  muses  about  this
unwelcome discovery, he glances down to the street level and  busy  sidewalk
below, and  involuntarily  shudders,  imagining  the  potential  damage  and
injury which could be caused if one or more of  the  granite  veneer  blocks
were to become dislodged and fall.  Realizing that this  rusted  clip  angle
may only be an isolated instance, he quickly dismantles  the  remaining  two
window units, only to discover the  same  situation  with  the  clip  angles
within reach.  Based on this evidence, it appears that the exterior  granite
veneer  blocks  are  merely  stacked  on  one  another,  with  very   little
attachment to the building frame.

Working late that night, Brock finishes his  written  report  covering  only
the specific items required in the contract scope of work.  The first  thing
in the morning, he hands the report to Julie Adams, and orally  advises  her
of  his  findings  regarding  the  rusted  clip  angles,  which   were   not
specifically part of their scope of work.  She in turn makes an  appointment
with Charles Smith and delivers the report to him in person that  afternoon.
 At the same time, she advises Smith of the clip angle situation.

Smith thanks Julie for giving him the information, compliments her on  doing
a thorough job, as usual, and says that the written report  will  be  passed
on to Goldworthy, as  requested.   He  then  indicates  that  he  has  other
important matters to attend to and quickly ends the  meeting.   On  the  way
back to the office, Julie goes over  her  conversation  with  Smith  in  her
mind, and is bothered by the  sudden  termination  of  the  meeting.   As  a
result, she calls Smith on the telephone as soon as she  gets  back  to  her
office, indicating that the condition of the  exterior  cladding  is  a  far
more important issue than any of the items covered in the written report.

Charles Smith tells her that he appreciates her concern,  but  the  purchase
deal is too far along to do anything about it.  Since the buyers  and  their
representative have had access to the  building  for  several  months,  they
could  have  investigated  and  determined  the  condition  of  the  granite
cladding themselves.  In fact, they may  already  know  about  it  and  have
accounted for it in their financial offer of  purchase.   If  not,  it  will
turn up on one of the required periodic building checks in  the  future,  if
it is really a substantial problem.  In addition, he says that the  deal  is
now ready to close the following afternoon, and her  cooperation  in  seeing
things his way will result in additional  work  on  other  projects  in  the
future.  Besides, if she will feel more comfortable,  he  will  give  her  a
confidential letter confirming that  she  had  fully  informed  him  of  the
cladding situation.

Not knowing what else to say, she murmurs her assent.

That night, Julie presents the situation to her husband  for  his  comments.
After hearing the story, he indicates  that  these  things  happen  all  the
time, and it is the responsibility of the buyer to be satisfied with  regard
to the condition of the building.  Besides, having Smith complete  the  deal
successfully has serious implications  about  the  future  of  her  business
relationship with him, and  therefore  serious  implications  regarding  the
future success of her company.  After  all,  there  are  the  fifteen  other
people working for Julie, as well as their families, to  think  of.   Making
an issue of the situation, or even worse going public,  would  only  destroy
that relationship with Smith, and could jeopardize her  business.   Besides,
in the heat of the moment she accepted the information given her  by  Brock,
but since she did not observe the clip angles personally, can  she  be  sure
that Brock’s conclusions were accurate?

What should Julie do, if anything?

Alternate Approaches and Survey Results for “What’s the Angle?” (Case 1010)
1.    Do nothing more.   The  report  has  been  written  and  delivered  in
    accordance with the contracted scope of work,  which  did  not  include
    inspection of the granite veneer clip angles.  In addition, the client,
    Mr. Smith, has been notified  of  the  condition  of  the  clip  angles
    observed, and it is his responsibility to deal with that information as
    he feels appropriate.  Also, the contract  specifically  required  that
    “all information discovered by the engineer shall become  the  property
    of the client and shall not be released to others without the  client’s
    express written consent.”
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  4%

2.    Do nothing more.  There is no evidence  that  the  rusted  clip  angle
    situation is widespread.  It is reasonable  to  deduce  that  the  clip
    angles closest to the window casements would be the ones  most  exposed
    to moisture entering the wall cavity because the window  casements  are
    old, and while structurally sound,  most  likely  leak  a  fair  amount
    around the outside.  Julie might recommend that the window casements be
    caulked from the outside, if Smith feels it to be appropriate.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  0%

3.    Do nothing more.  Mr. Smith has indicated that the  purchase  deal  is
    too far along to do anything about it at this late date.  Additionally,
    the new owners are equally responsible since they  had  access  to  the
    building  for  several  months  and  may  even  know  of  the   problem
    themselves.  Not everything is disclosed between buyer  and  seller  in
    these sorts of negotiations.  If not,  one  of  the  periodic  building
    checks will pick up the clip angle  defect  in  the  future.   The  new
    owners will be in a much  better  position  to  handle  the  corrective
    action at that time, since they will not be rushed by  a  deadline  and
    will not have to do a haphazard repair job.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  1%

4.    Do nothing more.  Mr. Smith has  said  that  he  will  write  Julie  a
    confidential letter to her indicating that  she  notified  him  of  the
    situation, and if, by chance, anything should happen in the future, the
    letter will prove she acted in a professional manner by informing Smith
    of  the  situation.   Julie  certainly  cannot   be   responsible   for
    contracting for the repair work and certifying that every granite block
    in the building has been repaired.  She runs an engineering  firm,  and
    is not a building repair contractor nor does she own the property.   In
    addition, Smith indicated that he has additional business  for  Julie’s
    firm in the future, and  it  would  be  a  poor  business  decision  to
    jeopardize the well-being of her staff by incurring Smith’s ire.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  6%

5.    Amend the report to clearly state the elements of work that  her  firm
    was  retained  to  complete,  and  add  a  list  of  items  that   were
    specifically excluded from their services (probably six to eight  items
    long) so that it is clear when the probable accident happens  that  the
    cladding anchors/clips were not meant to be examined  as  part  of  her
    firm's scope of services.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  4%

6.    Write a separate report to  Smith  describing  the  condition  of  the
    observed  clip  angles,  recommending  that  the  building  be   closed
    immediately and the adjacent sidewalks and portions  of  streets  which
    could be effected by falling granite veneer  blocks  be  cordoned  off.
    Indicate that as the structural engineer, she has an  ethical  duty  to
    protect the health, safety and welfare of the public.  This is a matter
    of responsibility to the public, which takes precedence  over  contract
    clauses requiring confidentiality.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  23%

7.    Approach Smith again and  recommend  that  she  be  retained  to  make
    additional clip angle observations throughout the building to determine
    the extent of the problem.  If it is localized adjacent to  the  window
    casements, or only near a few window casements (perhaps on the side  of
    the building most exposed to wind and rain), it will  not  be  a  major
    issue to rectify, even though it may delay  closing  the  purchase  and
    sales agreement for a period of time.  It is quite possible that  Brock
    Williams may have over-emphasized his perception of the problem due  to
    the time constraint to complete the inspection project,  and  the  fact
    that he only made observations at three locations.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  23%

8.    The public safety issue,  if  there  is  one  in  this  case,  is  the
    responsibility of the owner (Smith), unless Julie is certain  there  is
    imminent danger to the public.  Therefore, informing the owner  is  all
    that is necessary.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  1%

9.    Make an after-hours telephone call to Goldworthy's office and leave  a
    voice message suggesting that he defer closing the deal  until  he  has
    his own independent structural assessment made, if  he  hasn't  already
    had one done.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  1%

10.   Immediately  consult  with  her  attorney  to  ascertain  her  'legal'
    position concerning the release of information to  persons  other  than
    her client, in violation of the provisions of  her  contract  with  Mr.
    Smith.  She could be committing a breach of  her  contract  with  Smith
    which could lead to an expensive law suit.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  11%

11.   Tell Smith that it may be necessary to confer with the local  building
    officials, and he should consider doing this sooner than later, if  for
    no other reason than to inform them of what  has  transpired  and  what
    steps (if any) are being taken to determine the extent of the perceived
    problem.  While panic is not warranted at this point, due diligence is.


      Percentage of votes agreeing:  11%

12.   Inform the city building  official  personally  of  Brock's  findings.
    The most important goal is getting the building  repaired  immediately.
    Further, Julie Adams's self-interest is to  preserve  and  enhance  her
    hard-earned reputation, which will crumble if the granite blocks  fall.


      Percentage of votes agreeing:  2%

13.   Tell Smith that if he does not inform the city  building  official  of
    the condition of the exterior veneer clips as observed by Brock  within
    24 hours, she will do so herself.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  10%

14.   Do as Smith requested and submit the report  without  mention  of  the
    observed condition of the exterior veneer clips.  However,  she  should
    also make an anonymous telephone call to the  Channel  9  investigative
    team to alert them to the building problem.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  0%

15.   After sale of the Inverness Block  is  completed,  Julie  should  meet
    with the city building official and suggest, based on her  observations
    in the downtown area over some period of time,  that  they  should  pay
    particular attention to stone veneer buildings without mentioning  this
    specific case.  She should indicate that her observations were  limited
    in extent, but sufficient  to  be  concerning.   This  way  the  public
    authorities can 'discover' and take credit for catching and resolving a
    dangerous situation.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  3%


Forum Comments from Respondents
1.    All too often, engineers have a tendency to jump to  conclusions  that
    are based on meager evidence.  It  is  always  wise  to  determine  the
    extent of the problem as far as possible before choosing  a  course  of
    action.  Nonetheless, in a situation such as this where  there  appears
    to be a real potential of injury, as well as  property  damage,  it  is
    also wise to proceed without delay to gather the necessary  information
    in order to make a wise and principled decision.

2.    In addition to the ethical obligation of the engineer to  protect  the
    health, safety and welfare of the public, in many states there  is  the
    legal duty to inform appropriate authorities of  situations  discovered
    which may cause injury to the public.

3.    Julie should request permission to look at some more of the clips,  on
    her own time if necessary.  If Smith refuses to let  her  look  at  the
    clips she has to go public right then and there.  If she finds that  it
    is a serious problem, she must make sure that the matter  is  known  to
    the buyers and they are aware that it must be fixed.

4.    Julie should offer to do the additional clip assessment work  free  or
    at a reduced cost.  Cost should not  be  allowed  to  contribute  to  a
    potentially significant public hazard.

5.    The decision on what to do about the  findings  is  Mr.  Smith's.   It
    would be best for him if he knew the full extent of the problem.  If it
    is a problem only around the windows,  or  only  on  one  side  of  the
    building, the buyer may be OK with taking care of it.  If the façade is
    going to collapse next week, I'm sure that Mr. Smith  doesn't  want  to
    just let it go.  Including this in the report  helps  him  realize  his
    responsibility in the situation.  Offering to help is a  professionally
    and ethically sound course or action for Julie.

6.    Julie should not have signed the contract in the first  place  without
    stating that she would not compromise her ethical duties.

7.    Smith’s arguments about insufficient time to do  anything  because  of
    the purchase agreement deadline are prevalent in many  instances  where
    property transfer is involved.  In reality, a change in the established
    deadline can always be negotiated by the parties.   It  is  far  better
    that the seller notify  the  buyer  of  such  a  last-minute  potential
    problem and negotiate an appropriate method of  handling  it,  than  to
    keep it undisclosed, only to find that s/he is sued  by  the  buyer  at
    later date for not disclosing the issue.  Whether the  allegation  will
    hold up in court or not doesn’t matter.  The  cost  to  the  seller  of
    adequate legal defense against the complaint, as well as the  time  and
    energy involved in defending the case, can be  substantial,  especially
    if injury or a loss of life is involved.

8.    Engineers who believe that a letter from the client, or  the  client’s
    lawyer, will protect them from a future law suit and judgment are naive
    at best.  While a specific indemnification agreement wherein the client
    holds the engineer harmless in all instances may be some protection, if
    it is a question of the legality of the  engineer’s  actions,  such  an
    agreement may not be adequate.  It is always better  to  do  the  right
    thing (and hopefully, for the right reason).

9.    Promises by the client for future work appear to be prevalent in  many
    instances.   Nonetheless,  such  promises  are  only  as  good  as  the
    integrity of the person making them.  The engineer ought  to  seriously
    consider whether it is in the firm’s best interest to  continue  to  do
    work for such a client if it appears that these promises are made  only
    to persuade the engineer to “bend the rules” here and there.  Sooner or
    later, greater problems with the client are most certain to arise,  and
    it will be all the more difficult for the engineer to avoid involvement
    in unethical or illegal situations due to previous,  progressive  “rule
    bending”.  No promise of future work,  no  matter  how  attractive,  is
    worth the loss  of  the  engineer’s  integrity.   Also,  it  should  be
    remembered that Mr. Smith wants to leave town forever to retire to  his
    Grand Cayman Island estate, and therefore will likely not  continue  to
    do business in this city or area, if anywhere.

10.   Although Julie has a  contractual  obligation  of  confidentiality,  a
    case could be stated that the  responsibility  to  the  safety  of  the
    public would override and release her from the contractual obligation.

11.   Acceptance of the confidential letter from Smith  could  be  construed
    as a cover up and would make Julie an accomplice in any  actions  taken
    at a later date.  She also has to consider her  responsibility  to  her
    employees in the event that she were sued for malpractice.

12.   Julie cannot go behind her  client's  back  and  report  her  findings
    about the build [sic].  She signed a contract of confedenciality [sic].
    It may hamper her work relations with Mr. Smith.  She also has to  take
    in  to  consideration  the  employees  and  their   families.    Client
    confedinciality [sic] is part  of  the  engineer's  "Codes  of  ethics"
    [sic].

13.   Julie should have Brock  complete  the  entire  report  including  the
    findings regarding the clip angles  and  transmit  it  to  the  client,
    Smith, with a cover letter indicating that  because  of  the  potential
    threat to public safety and life, a copy of the report will be sent  to
    the local building official.  She should also include  an  invoice  for
    her firm's services.

14.   The issue of disclosure of a defective building condition is a  matter
    of real estate law.  If smith is breaking the law by not disclosing the
    potentially dangerous condition, the real estate transaction  could  be
    nullified, even if the problem is discovered at a later date.  In  such
    a case, the new buyer would  have  no  problem  receiving  compensatory
    damages as well.  Julie should inform Smith of such a possible scenario
    and note that if such a criminal or civil action is filed, Julie's firm
    would no longer be bound by their confidentiality agreement  and  would
    be obligate under the law to provide all information requested.

15.   Julie should inform the city building official  that  her  client  has
    important and relevant information involving the safety of  the  public
    and explain that  she  cannot  reveal  the  information  because  of  a
    confidentiality clause in her contract with the client.

16.   Julie should keep an eye on her husband since he has a  well-developed
    ability to rationalize and may have other moral shortcomings  that  may
    affect her more personally.

