
                     The Coercive Contribution Conundrum
                                 (Case 1006)

The mission of the National Institute for Engineering Ethics  (NIEE)  is  to
promote ethics in engineering practice  and  education.   One  component  of
NIEE  is  the  Applied  Ethics  in  Professional  Practice  (AEPP)  program,
providing free engineering  ethics  cases  for  educational  purposes.   The
following case may be reprinted if it is provided  free  of  charge  to  the
engineer or  student.   Written  permission  is  required  if  the  case  is
reprinted for resale.  For more cases and other NIEE  Products  &  Services,
contact  the  National  Institute  for  Engineering   Ethics,   Texas   Tech
University, www.niee.org..  (All reprints must contain these statements)

The Case:
You recently received  a  degree  in  engineering  from  a  school  with  an
excellent  reputation.   Immediately  after  graduation   you   accepted   a
challenging job offer from Civil Works  Engineering,  Inc.,  a  medium-sized
firm in a large, expanding metropolitan  city  in  the  Midwest.   The  firm
(CWE) has been quite successful and is held in  high  regard  in  the  local
construction and business community.  It has  a  relatively  broad  base  of
experience in public works engineering  projects,  and  specializes  in  the
design of roads and bridges.  Most of the firm's design contracts have  been
with city and county public works departments, although a few projects  have
been completed for various state agencies.

After working for only eight months for CWE, you found  a  bonus  check  for
$1,000 in your pay envelope last week.  On the same  day  it  was  announced
that the firm has been chosen for several new design contracts, and you  are
pleased that your efforts to date appear  to  have  been  appreciated.   The
following afternoon, you and two other  of  the  younger  engineers  in  the
company were called together in a meeting with Charlie Oxx, the  supervising
engineer of your design group.  In the meeting, Charlie explained  that  the
firm owes certain members  of  the  city  council  a  considerable  debt  of
gratitude for their  endorsement  of  CWE  in  obtaining  city  road  design
contracts.  He also indicated that the president of CWE, I. M.  Smooth,  has
already demonstrated his appreciation  to  these  city  council  members  by
contributing to each of their upcoming re-election campaign funds.   Charlie
mentioned that Mr. Smooth expects  the  same  type  of  "loyalty"  from  his
employees toward these council members.

You have thought about that meeting, and are  uncertain  what  to  do.   You
wonder if you do not contribute a total of at least $1,000  to  the  council
members' campaign funds, will that be looked upon by Charlie Oxx as  an  act
of disloyalty.  Also, you  wonder  what  impact  that  would  have  on  your
longevity and future career advancement with CWE.

What do you do?


Alternate Approaches and  Survey  Results  for  “The  Coercive  Contribution
Conundrum” (Case 1006)
1.    You  have  heard  that  it  is  not  unusual  for  engineers  to  make
    individual contributions to the campaign funds  for  various  political
    figures  who  have  demonstrated  support  for  the  local  engineering
    community being awarded city design contracts.  On this basis, you make
    out checks totally $1,150 to the council members suggested  by  Charlie
    Oxx, send the checks in the mail, and give a list of the  contributions
    to Charlie for his information.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 0%

2.    You  have  heard  that  it  is  not  unusual  for  engineers  to  make
    individual contributions to the campaign funds  for  various  political
    figures  who  have  demonstrated  support  for  the  local  engineering
    community being awarded city design contracts.   However,  you  realize
    that you will have to pay state and federal income tax  on  the  $1,000
    bonus.  As a result, you make out checks for  the  difference  totaling
    $765 to the council members suggested by Charlie Oxx, send  the  checks
    in the mail, and give a list of the contributions to  Charlie  for  his
    information.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 3%

3.    While you understand  that  engineers  often  contribute  to  campaign
    funds for political figures who are supportive of the local engineering
    community in general, you are not certain that contributing to only the
    council members who have been directly supportive of CWE, as listed  by
    Charlie Oxx, is appropriate.  However, since you are relatively new  in
    town and not familiar with the voting records of  specific  individuals
    on the city council, you decide to contribute $1,000 to those suggested
    by Charlie.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 5%

4.    Make this a win-win situation.  You  decide  to  donate  half  of  the
    bonus to the council members, as suggested by Charlie Oxx, and keep the
    rest of the bonus for yourself.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 3%

5.    You are not sure what to do,  so  you  get  together  with  the  other
    younger engineers that were in the  meeting  to  reach  some  consensus
    regarding the approach all of you should take to the issue.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 17%

6.    You are not sure what to do, so you  approach  several  of  the  older
    engineers in the office to determine what has generally  been  done  in
    the past.  If the usual procedure  is  to  contribute,  then  you  will
    contribute as well.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 8%

7.    You are not comfortable  about  being  told  to  contribute  money  to
    specific campaign funds, no matter  whether  these  individual  council
    members have been instrumental in CWE obtaining projects from the  city
    in the past or not.  You decide not  to  contribute,  and  not  to  say
    anything one way or the other to Charlie Oxx.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 5%

8.    You are not comfortable  about  being  told  to  contribute  money  to
    specific campaign funds, no matter  whether  these  individual  council
    members have been instrumental in CWE obtaining projects from the  city
    in the past or not.  You decide not to contribute, and to tell  Charlie
    Oxx of your decision and reason for it.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 33%

9.    You can see no connection between the bonus check and  the  suggestion
    about making contributions to several  selected  campaign  funds.   The
    bonus was given to you because of the good work you  have  been  doing.
    The suggestion to  contribute  to  specific  campaign  funds  was  made
    because you and the other younger engineers in  the  meeting  were  not
    aware that this is a normal company practice, and it is good  business.
    You decide to contribute $1,000 to  demonstrate  your  loyalty  to  the
    company.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 2%

10.   You are not comfortable  about  being  told  to  contribute  money  to
    specific campaign funds, no matter  whether  these  individual  council
    members have been instrumental in CWE obtaining projects from the  city
    in  the  past  or  not.   Instead,  you  take  the  bonus  check,  make
    arrangements to rent a Jaguar and spend a three-day weekend  with  your
    girlfriend/boyfriend at the fanciest ski resort in the state.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 3%

11.   Return the bonus check and prepare to seek employment  elsewhere  with
    a company whose ideas are more in line with yours.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 13%

12.   Mr. Smooth has gone too far.  You are  sure  the  election  commission
    would love to hear about this.  In order to get more  information,  you
    have a long chat with Charlie Oxx and find out what more you can  about
    this in-house contribution system.   Then  an  anonymous  note  to  the
    election commission (with a copy to the state  board  of  registration)
    should bring Mr. Smooth into line!
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 8%


Forum Comments from Respondents
1.    This very thing happened to me twice in my professional career.   Both
    times I did not contribute.  The first time I was a summer employee  of
    a Midwest state highway department in 1962.  The governor wanted to use
    the contribution for his fund.  I refused and kept my job.  The  second
    time I was a consultant in an eastern state, and  the  firm  was  on  a
    retainer for the city, for which we did all of  their  surveying.   The
    mayor was having a $100 per plate dinner and sent a  collector  to  see
    how many tickets we wanted to buy.  One partner and I said none.   When
    the second partner came in at the end of the day he immediately  called
    the mayor's office and ordered ten tickets.  He  was  the  "politically
    wise" one in the firm.  We needed the work.  Intellectually,  I  cannot
    agree to paying a "gift" for the right to do work.  Sometimes you  have
    to do it to meet the payroll…at least that was the way it was explained
    to me.

2.    I know that in our area, if your firm actively works in the  municipal
    or government market, the elected officials expect firm  principals  or
    employees will make  individual  contributions.   Also,  in  government
    there are those elected officials who support the  consulting  industry
    and the QBS (Qualifications Based Selection) criteria, while there  are
    those that have little respect for professional engineers.   If,  as  a
    professional,   one   has   strong   feelings   about   being   treated
    professionally, why would you not support a candidate  who  shares  the
    same views?  I think at times too many of us keep our head in the  sand
    when we could be proactive and help our community.  This is by no means
    an endorsement of political donations with the expectation of preferred
    treatment.

3.    Bonus checks should be compensation for value  added  performance  and
    yours to spend as you please.  Suggest to Charlie  Oxx  that  the  firm
    form a PAC (Political Action Coalition) to collect funds for  desirable
    political and other related contributions.  Membership and contribution
    to the PAC is voluntary.  At  least  this  is  an  above-board  way  to
    encourage contributions.

4.    The problem with PACs is that typically only  federal  (and  sometimes
    state) level politicians will accept  contributions  from  one.   Local
    candidates usually only accept individual contributions.

5.    Remain silent and do not  contribute.   If  asked  by  your  superiors
    about your contribution, explain you do feel it to be ethical to make a
    contribution because of the  firm's  contractual  obligation  with  the
    city.  If all goes well, you are commended for your  ethical  decision,
    you keep the bonus money, and you retain your job because of  the  good
    work you have done.  If it turns out otherwise, brush  up  your  resume
    and look for work elsewhere.  After all, an ethical  person  would  not
    want to work for an unethical company anyway!

6.    The pressure from Charlie Oxx is clearly  inappropriate  and  probably
    violates several campaign laws in addition to impinging on your freedom
    of speech rights under the Constitution.  If you sit down with  Charlie
    and ask him to confirm his intent, you  will  probably  be  seen  as  a
    "troublemaker", which will do your career at CWE no good at  all.   But
    who would want to work there?  Your need to contribute will  only  grow
    as you advance through the ranks of the politically corrupt.  Since the
    election is probably a few months away, start looking  for  a  new  job
    now.  If you believe in the causes espoused by the city  council  folk,
    and you would have given them a donation anyway, go  ahead;  otherwise,
    stick the bonus check into a good investment and hang onto it.

7.    Confront Charlie Oxx and Mr. Smooth with  the  compromising  situation
    created by their request coming so closely on the heels of  the  $1,000
    bonus award.  Offer to pay back all or part of the bonus as a matter of
    principle.  If the offer is accepted, pay.  Resign or not depending  on
    other  factors.   If  the   offer   is   declined,   do   nothing,   or
    contribute…whatever seems appropriate; it doesn't matter ethically.

8.    Divide the after tax money equally among all of  the  council  members
    and contribute anonymously.

9.    Talk with Charlie personally and tell him that if the bonus was  given
    with  the  expectation  that  it  would  be  used   for   a   political
    contribution, you will give the bonus back.  If he  confirms  that  was
    the intent of the bonus, it would be in your best  interest  to  search
    out new employment.

10.   Consult with the other young engineers.  Refuse to contribute  to  the
    council members.  In the meantime, begin to seek out other employment.

11.   The check in the mail for $1,000 is too coincidental with the  request
    for contributions to the city councilmen  for  the  same  amount.   The
    method being used will put a lot of money into the hands of the  select
    candidates favored by the company.  This is unethical, if not  illegal.
    To participate is to agree with the foul practice.  I would return  the
    check to the company with a note stating that I do not  wish  to  be  a
    party to this action because it appears to be unethical.

12.   Confront Mr. Smooth and see if he'll change his point of view.  If  he
    doesn't relax his demands, get the backing of  the  entire  office,  if
    they feel the same way you do, and confront him as a unit.

13.   Although the coercion intent is very evident,  I  would  approach  the
    older engineers to see how these situations  have  played  out  in  the
    past.  It could be that  individuals  have  fared  quite  well  in  the
    company without making such contributions.  The bonus  is  mine  to  do
    with as I please.  I  would  consider  Charlie's  words  as  a  cue  to
    actively support politicians who actively support  local  industry  and
    would avoid the impression of  impropriety  associated  with  rewarding
    specific  council  members.   If  the  older  engineers  say  that  not
    contributing is punished, I would use the $1,000 to finance a  new  job
    search.

14.   We choose to consult an attorney as to the legality of the issue.   We
    would not donate the money either way.  If the action is illegal,  then
    we would seek the attorney's advice on how to report the  situation  to
    the proper authorities.  We would seek employment with another firm.

15.   The ASCE Code of Ethics is clear on this  issue.   A  guideline  under
    Canon 5 states, "Engineers shall not give, solicit or  receive,  either
    directly  or  indirectly,  any  political  contribution,  gratuity,  or
    unlawful consideration in order to secure work, exclusive  of  securing
    salaried positions through employment agencies."   With  this  in  mind
    there is no doubt that the  contribution  is  inappropriate.   I  would
    explain to Mr. Oxx that I will not  be  contributing  to  the  campaign
    funds, explaining why.  I would offer to return the bonus if the intent
    was for me to pass this along in the form of a political  contribution,
    and not based solely on my work.  Needless to say, I  would  be  making
    sure that my resume is up to date.

16.   Ultimately you feel based on the NSPE Code of  Ethics  that  no  money
    should be given to the [selected] council members' campaign funds.   If
    it is company policy to give bonus money to the council members' funds,
    then the money should be returned to Charlie Oxx.  If it is  not,  then
    the money should be kept as a bonus.

17.   I would tell Charlie Oxx that I only give contributions  to  political
    figures on the basis of how well they do their job.  And  I  would  not
    support any candidate that can be  swayed  by  campaign  contributions.
    Then I would tell Charlie Oxx  that  as  an  American  that  loves  his
    country, I will have to let the  election  commission  know  about  the
    transactions he had suggested.  I would then  keep  the  $1,000  bonus,
    because I'll need it when I get fired!

