
                 Engineering Ethics in Spain: The Risky Tank
                                 (Case 1041)

The mission of the National Institute for Engineering Ethics  (NIEE)  is  to
promote ethics in engineering practice  and  education.   One  component  of
NIEE  is  the  Applied  Ethics  in  Professional  Practice  (AEPP)  program,
providing free engineering  ethics  cases  for  educational  purposes.   The
following case may be reprinted if it is provided  free  of  charge  to  the
engineer or  student.   Written  permission  is  required  if  the  case  is
reprinted for resale.  For more cases and other NIEE  Products  &  Services,
contact  the  National  Institute  for  Engineering   Ethics,   Texas   Tech
University, www.niee.org..  (All reprints must contain these statements)


Case Study By:
Guillermo Palau-Salvador, Assistant Professor, Rural Engineering
      Department, Hydraulic Division, Technical University of Valencia,
      Spain.
Ana de Luis, PhD Student, Agricultural Engineering School, Technical
      University of Valencia, Spain.

Editorial Comments By:
William D. Lawson, P.E., Ph.D., Deputy Director, National Institute for
      Engineering Ethics, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX.

      Editor’s Note: When doing business internationally, it is important to
      recognize both the universal ethical obligations of the engineer and
      the specific laws and regulations that govern engineering practice.
      The geographic context for this case study – a rural community in
      Spain – reveals certain distinctions between engineering practice in
      Spain versus the United States.  Some of these distinctions are
      discussed at the end of the case.

The Case:
Carlos has recently finished his engineering degree and has been hired by  a
firm, Tencasa, that currently focuses  on  structural  design  projects  but
wants to expand its  range  of  services  to  include  hydraulics  projects.
Carlos has a six-month contract and, after that,  the  company  will  decide
whether they keep him as an employee of the firm.

It is Carlos’  first  job  and  he  will  be  in  charge  of  Tencasa’s  new
hydraulics division. After a month, Carlos has not yet been  in  the  field,
but this situation changes.  Carlos’ boss tells him that they have  found  a
project, but it has to be completed  in  less  than  a  month.  The  project
consists of building a storage tank and several pipelines that connect  with
the water supply system for the town of Lliria, near Valencia (Spain).

The project seems straightforward, but Carlos spends  all  weekend  studying
and reviewing the entire project  and  its  calculations.   Under  direction
from his boss, on Monday morning Carlos picks up  three  Ecuadorian  workers
and goes to the town to begin work on the project.

During the first week the work is  clear-cut,  and  the  project  progresses
quickly. Carlos spends a lot of  time  with  the  workers  —  having  lunch,
working side by side with them, or simply talking. In time he realizes  that
the three workers are illegal immigrants. One used  to  be  a  schoolteacher
and the other two were musicians.  He also learns that the  workers  do  not
have any type of worker’s compensation  or  other  medical  insurance.  They
tell him that they earn three  or  four  times  the  wages  they  earned  in
Ecuador and their families depend on  this  money.   Further,  they  realize
they do not have any medical insurance and that  construction  work  carries
some risk to their health.

Carlos sympathizes with  the  workers  and  becomes  increasingly  concerned
about safety on the construction site as well  as  the  potential  liability
associated  with  a  government  investigation  related  to  hiring  illegal
immigrants.  However, Carlos balances  this  concern  with  the  realization
that the men need to earn money and support their  families.   Besides,  the
workers are doing a good job.

During the final week of the project, the main task  is  the  completion  of
the storage tank.  This tank  is  a  concrete  structure,  which  should  be
completed in five days. As the three Ecuadorian workers have  no  experience
in working with concrete, Carlos is concerned about their ability to  safely
and correctly complete the  project.   He  thinks  Tencasa  should  increase
jobsite safety  measures  and/or  hire  appropriately-qualified  workers  to
complete the tank construction.

Carlos meets with his  boss  and  recommends  that  Tencasa  hire  qualified
workers, implement additional jobsite  safety  measures,  and  legalize  the
Ecuadorian workers (thereby making them  eligible  for  worker  compensation
benefits). Carlos’ boss smiles upon hearing the proposals and  gives  Carlos
an ultimatum: Carlos must finish  the  project  with  the  workers  he  has.
Furthermore, Carlos must forget  the  Ecuadorians’  situation  because  they
should be grateful they have a job, and if they are not grateful, there  are
plenty of other workers who would happily take their place.

Carlos does not know what to  do.   On  the  one  hand,  he  knows  that  an
accident could happen during the tank construction and he feels  it  is  not
fair to risk the health of the workers.  But on the  other  hand,  he  knows
that the Ecuadorians want their jobs.  In addition, if  Carlos  successfully
completes this job on time, he can get a permanent contract with the firm.

What should Carlos do?


Alternate Approaches and Survey Results for “Engineering Ethics in  Spain  –
The Risky Tank” (Case 1041)

   1. Go on with the work. The chances of having an accident are  very  low,
      and the Ecuadorians agree with completing the job. Accepting the  risk
      is their decision, even if the Ecuadorians have to work 24 hours  each
      day in order to complete the project on schedule.  Percentage of votes
      agreeing: 4%


   2. Tell the authorities. Although the Ecuadorian workers want their jobs,
      it is not fair to exploit employees by having them work at  their  own
      risk without medical insurance. Carlos should tell the authorities and
      report what is happening to others within  his  firm.   Percentage  of
      votes agreeing: 21%


   3. Withdraw from the position.  It is wrong to allow further exploitation
      of the Ecuadorian workers!  Carlos should resign his position  and  go
      to the media to openly denunciate this kind of abuse.   Percentage  of
      votes agreeing: 7%


   4.  Withdraw,  but  without  denunciation.   Carlos  does  not  want   to
      contribute to worker exploitation, but he realizes that the Ecuadorian
      workers are the most vulnerable.  Carlos should resign his position as
      a matter of personal protest but say nothing  to  anyone  outside  the
      company, allowing the Ecuadorians to continue work and send  money  to
      their families.  Percentage of votes agreeing: 12%


   5. Discuss with engineer friends. Carlos should tell his colleagues about
      the situation and solicit their recommendations about what to do. With
      this information, Carlos will better know what to do  in  the  future,
      even if the advice does not remedy the current  situation  completely.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 14%


   6. Implement  additional  safety  measures.  Carlos  and  the  Ecuadorian
      workers agree to complete the construction  work.   But  in  order  to
      increase jobsite safety, Carlos should require the Ecuadorians to take
      an intensive training course over the weekend  (he  and  some  friends
      will teach the course) that will show them how to more safely  do  the
      work.  Percentage of votes agreeing: 21%


   7. Personally complete the most dangerous  tasks.  It  is  Carlos’  first
      construction project and he does not want anyone to be  injured.   So,
      Carlos should personally complete the  most  difficult  tasks  himself
      during the next few days.  This will stretch Carlos’ responsibilities,
      but the tradeoff is justified.  Percentage of votes agreeing: 3%


   8. There is no dilemma. Where  is  the  moral  dilemma?  All  agree  with
      carrying on with the construction. The Ecuadorian  workers  know  what
      they are doing and have assumed the risks in order to have high-paying
      work.  Percentage of votes agreeing: 2%


   9. Look to the future.  If Carlos finishes the project  on  schedule,  he
      can use his influence and success to persuade Tencasa to obtain papers
      for the (now experienced) Ecuadorian workers.  This project is nothing
      less  than  an  opportunity  to  regularize  the   Ecuadorians’   work
      situation.  Percentage of votes agreeing: 6%


  10. Take matters in his own hands. Carlos knows that it  is  both  illegal
      and unfair to have workers without papers, and he cannot  continue  to
      allow this.  At the peril of losing his job, Carlos should by-pass his
      boss and start the paperwork to legalize the  Ecuadorians’  situation.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 10%



Some observations on engineering  practice  in  Spain  as  compared  to  the
United States:

One difference between engineering  practice  in  Spain  versus  the  United
States is that in Spain, there is no limitation on engineering practice  due
to the engineer’s age. Young engineers can  design,  build  or  supervise  a
project if they have been hired for  that.  Hence,  in  very  big  companies
which carry out large projects, it is normal to find a senior engineer  with
several young assistants who carry out the whole  project,  while  in  small
companies with small projects, young  engineers  are  in  charge  either  to
design or to build the construction.

In contrast, engineering licensure laws  in  the  United  States  would  not
allow a young engineer so much freedom.  Rather, a  young  engineer  in  the
United  States  (identified  as  an  “engineer  intern”   or   “engineer-in-
training”) would be required to  perform  all  engineering  work  under  the
direct supervision of a more experienced, licensed engineer.   With  respect
to professional responsibility, the engineer who supervises the  work  would
be legally responsible for the work; such a heavy responsibility  would  not
be given to a recent  engineering  graduate.   These  types  of  internships
typically persist for a minimum of four years, and only after obtaining  the
professional engineer’s  license  would  an  individual  be  allowed  to  do
projects on his/her own.

Another difference between Spanish and United  States  engineering  practice
is that in Spain there are three partners in  an  engineering  project:  the
designer, the builder  and  the  supervisor,  and  all  of  them  should  be
engineers. The designer designs the project, the builder constructs it,  and
the supervisor ensures that the builder  does  everything  as  it  has  been
specified. The  builder  and  the  supervisor  must  be  different  entities
(persons), but  the  designer  can  serve  dual  roles;  that  is,  be  both
designer/builder  or  designer/supervisor.   In  fact,   the   designer   is
frequently the supervisor of his/her project.

This is not typical for public  works  projects  in  the  United  States.   
Because of the highly developed division of labor, it would be  unusual  for
an engineer to both design and construct a project.  These are separate  job
functions, and usually  the  engineer  would  only  do  the  design.   Other
persons; that is, building contractors, would do the construction and  these
persons would not necessarily be engineers.  And in many cases, a  different
engineer might perform a quality control function on behalf of  the  project
owner during the construction process, but even this role does not  strictly
parallel the supervisor function found in Spanish engineering practice.

Forum Comments from Respondents

   1. It is difficult to imagine a  situation  where  Carlos  would  not  be
      morally obligated to challenge his  company's  practice  (policy?)  of
      hiring illegal immigrants.  Over the long term, such  a  practice  can
      only lead to problems.  The place to start is to get  advice,  ideally
      from experienced and trusted coworkers.  Ignoring the situation is not
      a good approach.


Comments from Board of Review Members

   1. Things ARE done differently overseas, and it  is  appropriate  to  pay
      attention to the internationalization of the profession  and  adapting
      to overseas ways of doing business.  The  actual  ethical  dilemma  is
      timeless -- a young engineer given the "take it or walk" ultimatum  by
      his supervisor -- and the context is less important than  the  tension
      created.  It can be observed that  "walking"  is  itself  a  means  of
      applying pressure to Carlos’ supervisor, because to do so would  cause
      the project to not finish on time.

   2. This international case embodies a universal  situation;  namely,  the
      dilemma of the appropriate treatment of staff  that  you  have  become
      friends with,  in  addition  to  appropriate  business  practices  and
      appropriate supervision of staff.  These constitute a good combination
      of things to think about.

   3. The fact that Spain has engineering practices different than those  in
      the United is beside  the  point.   It  is  probable  that  there  are
      engineering companies hiring illegal Mexicans who  are  doing  exactly
      the same thing in the United States.

   4. It is a common dilemma for a  new  engineer  to  cope  with  “accepted
      practice” on a job site or the office work place even if  that  person
      realizes the practice  is  wrong  or  inappropriate.   An  interesting
      international component of this case  is  whether  the  employment  of
      workers without “working papers” is illegal or only unethical  for  an
      employer  in  Spain.   I  also  think  that  including   international
      situations … not simply situations  as  viewed  by  Americans  working
      outside the US… can make significant strides in helping all  engineers
      view  issues  more  broadly.   Many  times,  individuals  (to  include
      Americans) cannot appreciate the sensitivity or importance of an issue
      from the perspective of those working in  different  legal,  cultural,
      and economic  situations.   Of  course,  just  because  we  eventually
      understand another’s position is  no  reason  for  us  to  find  their
      opinion to be in our best interests.   However,  it  is  an  essential
      first step in achieving win-win solutions.


