
                       One Good Turn Deserves Another
                                 (Case 1027)

The mission of the National Institute for Engineering Ethics  (NIEE)  is  to
promote ethics in engineering practice  and  education.   One  component  of
NIEE  is  the  Applied  Ethics  in  Professional  Practice  (AEPP)  program,
providing free engineering  ethics  cases  for  educational  purposes.   The
following case may be reprinted if it is provided  free  of  charge  to  the
engineer or  student.   Written  permission  is  required  if  the  case  is
reprinted for resale.  For more cases and other NIEE  Products  &  Services,
contact  the  National  Institute  for  Engineering   Ethics,   Texas   Tech
University, www.niee.org..  (All reprints must contain these statements)

The Case:
As part of the  professional  services  your  firm  (Multiplex  Design  Ltd)
offers, you provide site civil engineering designs for large office  complex
developments, including road, parking  lot  and  walkway  layouts;  pavement
design recommendations;  architectural  earthwork  design  for  landscaping;
surface water retention/detention and drainage design; and the design of on-
site wastewater treatment and disposal  facilities.   Most  of  your  firm’s
clients are relatively  large  developers,  and  since  you  are  a  project
manager for Multiplex Design, you  work  closely  with  a  number  of  these
clients for various projects.  Usually, you  work  on  a  project-by-project
basis  for  individual  sites  within  a   client’s   substantially   larger
development complex.

Since it appears to be second nature to many developers, it is  not  unusual
for a client to tell you that funds are  limited  for  your  services  on  a
specific project site, other firms have  been  knocking  on  their  door  in
increasing numbers seeking to obtain design contracts for the same  kind  of
services you provide, and you should remember there are a lot  more  project
sites to be designed within the overall complex planned  by  the  developer.
And  so  it  is  with  Bill  Broot,  development   manager   for   Universal
International Unlimited Developers, one of your clients.

You have been doing several  design  projects  for  Universal  International
Unlimited for a large complex  a  few  miles  outside  of  town  which  will
eventually expand to more than 20 multi-story office cluster sites.  So  far
you have been involved in all of the first  five  cluster  projects  in  the
complex,  the  latest  being  the  Dawson  Enterprises  four-building  site.
Despite the fact that you had been careful to spell out your scope  of  work
in your design contract with Universal International, Bill Broot  asked  you
to provide recommendations for several items not included in your  scope  of
work for the Dawson site, and you complied  (especially  when  he  told  you
there was a lot more work on other sites coming in a couple of months).

Just this morning, your in-house accountant  notified  you  that  the  final
figures for the Dawson project showed  that  your  group  had  overrun  your
$28,500 contract budget by $6,300, and there is  no  authorization  to  bill
Universal International for this additional work.  Your  original  estimated
profit for the Dawson project was $4,000, and now that is gone, plus more.

After a meager  lunch  (and  several  aspirin  tablets),  you  sit  down  to
concentrate on some paperwork piled high on your desk when the  receptionist
at the front desk calls you on the intercom and says that Bill  Broot  wants
you to call him about another project.  You call Broot, find  out  that  the
new project is directly adjacent to the Dawson  Enterprises  site,  and  the
work required is relatively similar in scope to what your original  contract
for the Dawson project had required.  You  agree  to  put  a  cost  estimate
together and call Broot back in the morning.

You complete your estimate for the new project site.  If the site were in  a
totally new area of the entire development complex, the budget estimate  for
your design work would be $31,700.  However, since the new site is  directly
adjacent to the  Dawson  site,  much  of  the  information  your  group  had
gathered for the Dawson site, as well as a substantial amount of  the  basic
analyses for that project, could be  used  for  the  new  project.   If  you
deduct the  estimated  cost  of  this  information  and  analyses  from  the
$31,700, you find you could probably do the work for the  new  project  site
for $22,800.

Keeping in mind the loss you suffered on the  Dawson  project,  as  well  as
Broot’s remarks about plenty more work coming in the  overall  complex,  and
the intensity of your competition pounding on his door for  work,  you  must
decide what to give Broot as  your   design  contract  amount  for  the  new
project.

What do you decide to tell Broot in the morning?

Alternate Approaches and Survey Results for “One Good Turn Deserves  Another”
(Case 1027)
1.    The budget estimate you give Broot is $63,400, lump  sum,  twice  what
    you think it would take on a new site, but the going rate for obnoxious
    jerks.  Hey, you are not in the business of engineering for experience;
    you’re in it for cash.  Since Broot has shown himself to be a difficult
    client, if not a credit risk, and since you bill lump sum, you  see  no
    reason not to get all you can out of the guy  if  he’ll  agree  to  it.
    After all, he’ll surely seek to “lean” on you to cut your fee, and  you
    want something left after the cutting is done.  Enough already!
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  2%

2.    The budget estimate you give Broot is $38,000, lump sum, the  cost  of
    your services for a new site plus  the  “extra”  unbilled  services  he
    finagled out of you on the last project.  You would like  to  bill  him
    double if you could, but you are just not quite  that  strong.   Still,
    you see no reason not to get all you can out of the guy if he’ll  agree
    to it.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  9%

3.    The budget estimate you give Broot is $31,700, lump sum, the  cost  of
    your services for a new site.  Whereas  you  would  like  to  bill  him
    double for the work if you could (he’s that much of a pain),  you  know
    he will only go so far, and this is probably the best fee you can  hope
    for.  As it is, you are concerned how he will come back and ask you  to
    lower your fee.  You see no reason not to get all you can  out  of  the
    guy if he’ll agree to it.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  26%

4.    The budget estimate you give Broot is $22,800, lump sum, the  cost  of
    your services for a follow-on site.  Whereas you would like to bill him
    double for the work if you could (he’s that much of a pain),  you  know
    how competitive he is, and this is probably the best you can hope  for.
    The $6,300 in unbilled effort from the past project is simply a cost of
    doing business, and you are thankful to have the job.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  9%

5.    The budget estimate you give Broot is $15,850, lump sum, half  of  the
    cost of your services for a new site.  It seems your competitors always
    find some way to cut their fee to half of yours, and this time you beat
    them to it.  This is the only way  to  stay  in  business  in  a  tight
    market.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  0%

6.    The budget estimate you give Broot is $31,700, not  to  exceed,  on  a
    time-and-materials basis, the cost of your services  for  a  new  site.
    You are a thorough person, and you know you can justify this figure  to
    Broot by down-playing the follow-on aspects of the work.  It  won’t  be
    an easy negotiation, but your logical approach, objective figures,  and
    calm demeanor will win the day.  This will allow you  to  complete  the
    project at an actual follow-on cost  of  $22,800,  but  to  adjust  the
    billings to make up for unbilled (past) revenue.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  7%

7.    The budget estimate you give Broot is $31,700, not  to  exceed,  on  a
    time-and-materials basis, the cost of your services  for  a  new  site.
    You are a thorough person, and you know you can justify this figure  to
    Broot by down-playing the follow-on character of the work.  It won’t be
    an easy negotiation, but your logical approach, objective figures,  and
    calm demeanor will win the day.  Sure  there  is  extra  money  in  the
    budget, but you view this as a contingency.  Under  good  circumstances
    this will allow you to  complete  the  project  at  a  normal,  if  not
    relaxed, pace, and under difficult  circumstances  it  gives  you  some
    badly-needed financial breathing room.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  26%

8.    The budget estimate you give Broot is $22,800, not  to  exceed,  on  a
    time-and-materials basis, the cost of your  services  for  a  follow-on
    site.  You figure that Broot will be so enamoured  with  your  low  fee
    that he’ll skate through the  negotiations  and  sign  you  up  without
    looking at the details.  Then he won’t notice how you carefully fluffed
    your low-ball budget by failing to include certain  non-essential,  yet
    desired, services you have normally identified as part of the scope  of
    work.  Once you get into the new project, the need for  those  services
    will become apparent, but at that point Broot will have no  choice  but
    give you the change orders for additional fees you seek.  Is  this  not
    the way the game is played?  Finally, Broot will respect you both as an
    engineer and a businessman.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  2%

9.    The budget estimate you give Broot is $22,800, not  to  exceed,  on  a
    time-and-materials basis, the cost of your  services  for  a  follow-on
    site.  You know that Broot is a hard-driving businessman, and  this  is
    all he will pay.  You also know the good will you bought  on  the  last
    project ($6,300 in unbilled effort) will get you this project, but that
    is all.  This is simply the cost of doing  business.   Considering  the
    options, it is less expensive than developing a new client relationship
    with different developer.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  17%

10.   The budget estimate you give Broot is $22,800, not  to  exceed,  on  a
    time-and-materials basis, the cost of your  services  for  a  follow-on
    site.  You know that Broot is a hard-driving businessman, and  this  is
    all he will pay.  But this doesn’t concern you all that much, since you
    know you can recoup the  cost  of  doing  business  in  Broot’s  market
    segment from your other, less-astute, municipal clients.  You  do  this
    by assigning less-efficient personnel to their projects, by negotiating
    more generous billable rates, and by more broadly defining the billable
    aspects of the work, among other things.  Your  municipal  clients  are
    great people.  You know they trust you  to  do  the  right  thing,  and
    that’s what business is all about.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  2%

Forum Comments from Respondents
1.    The budget estimate you give Broot is $26,800, not  to  exceed,  on  a
    time and materials basis.  This will  prove  very  competitive  against
    other companies as you will be giving Broot the benefit that  there  is
    certain basic work already achieved from the previous site.  The $4,000
    over the actual $22,800 will  cove  a  degree  of  the  loss  from  the
    previous project.  He  is  a  hard  businessman,  however,  you  are  a
    professional and expect to be remunerated for the work you do.

2.    If in the past you have allowed the client not  to  be  bound  by  the
    contract for a lump sum job, this is your mistake.  If you did not have
    contingencies for extras or did have and went over  that  amount,  that
    was also your mistake.  With a difficult client “doing favors” can  win
    you brownie points, but it is not a sound business practice if you have
    no contingency in the budget for these “extras.”  In  the  future  this
    client may remember that you have done him some favors, but in a  tight
    negotiation this will mean little to the client that is looking for the
    bottom dollar bid.  The extras you have given  this  client  have  been
    given to him.  Dealing with extras is part of the job and the fewer you
    have the better your bids will be received.  Having worked  with  firms
    that  are  change  order  producing  machines,  I  can  tell  you  from
    experience that option 8 will get you a reputation and will  ultimately
    hurt your business.

3.    Where is the ethical dilemma?  This is a normal business situation  we
    face several times a year.  You’ve been giving Broot “freebies” and  it
    busted your budget.  It’s time to make up the losses.  Tell Broot  that
    you’d ordinarily have to  charge  $31,700  for  the  new  project  (and
    explain why), but tell him that since the new site adjoins  the  Dawson
    site and since he is such a good client, you’ll do it for $29,100,  for
    a savings of $2,600.   When he squawks that  the  Dawson  project  only
    cost $28,500, remind him that the work at the Dawson site allows you to
    understand that the new site is more complex, and tell him that  if  he
    goes out on the street for a competitive proposal, he will  be  charged
    at least $33,000 by your competitors.

4.    It appears that a decision was made at the time  services  beyond  the
    scope of the original contract were  provided,  that  these  additional
    services would be furnished as a marketing effort.  If it was  intended
    to request an additional fee for the  additional  services,  it  should
    have been made at the time  Universal  requested  the  services.   Each
    project (or assignment) should stand on its own.  Therefore,  Multiplex
    Design Ltd should  quote the $22,000.  It would be ethical, however, to
    discuss the overruns on the first  project  and  request  relief.   The
    relief would be at the option of Universal, however.

5.    Always a fascinating situation.   You  underbudgeted  to  start  with,
    then did not have adequate project  management  accounting  during  the
    project to know when you were going over budget.   You  may  have  been
    able to argue for  additional  funds  had  you  broached  that  subject
    earlier, but now…nope.  You have a new section to work on.  You have  a
    process  to  use  to  develop  a  budget  estimate  and  may  have  the
    opportunity to recoup some of your loss from the  first  project.   The
    key here is value-based pricing.  When you sell hours, are you  getting
    your value, or are you reducing yourself to a commodity?  What  is  the
    value that Broot will receive from the services you  provide?   Because
    you have some knowledge that others don’t, you can “afford” to cut your
    price.  Does your knowledge reduce the value that  Broot  receives  for
    your services?  If you go and buy a Mercedes, the dealer may give you a
    “real deal” if you negotiate up front to buy another one each month for
    a year.  But when you go there and buy one at a  time,  why  should  he
    bother?  Price your services as high as you can reasonably go  for  the
    value you bring to the project.  Tell Broot you’ll do the work for $30k
    and recover what you lost on the first project.  (By the way, having  a
    client that you can’t make a fair profit with is not having much  of  a
    client!)

6.    Tell Broot you will  use  a  lump  sum  contract.   The  fee  for  the
    services should be based on the value of the service provided  not  the
    cost of providing them to avoid an ethical problem (i.e., charging  the
    client for time not actually spent on the client’s project).  In  other
    words, ethics would require that the engineering firm use  a  lump  sum
    contract based on the value of the services, not a cost-plus or  hourly
    contract.
