
                To Flush or Not to Flush: That's the Question
                                 (Case 1008)


The mission of the National Institute for Engineering Ethics  (NIEE)  is  to
promote ethics in engineering practice  and  education.   One  component  of
NIEE  is  the  Applied  Ethics  in  Professional  Practice  (AEPP)  program,
providing free engineering  ethics  cases  for  educational  purposes.   The
following case may be reprinted if it is provided  free  of  charge  to  the
engineer or  student.   Written  permission  is  required  if  the  case  is
reprinted for resale.  For more cases and other NIEE  Products  &  Services,
contact  the  National  Institute  for  Engineering   Ethics,   Texas   Tech
University, www.niee.org..  (All reprints must contain these statements)

The Case:
You are a senior engineer and project manager  for  Enviroconcern,  Inc.,  a
geo-environmental  group  specializing  in   groundwater   and   underground
pollution  mitigation  in  a  large,  heavily  industrialized  area  on  the
Atlantic seaboard.  Your firm has established  a  reputation  for  excellent
and accurate work among  clients  and  regulatory  agencies,  including  the
federal EPA and state health and ecology departments, as well.

Several months ago, your firm was contacted by Ira Klene, the  president  of
Industrial  Solvents,  Ltd.   His  company  was  named,  among  others,   as
suspected of having moderate to severe groundwater pollution  concentrations
beneath his  industrial  solvent  manufacturing  plant  and  adjacent  plant
property by the state regulatory agency.  In order  to  avoid  severe  fines
and potential lengthy litigation, Mr. Klene negotiated a contract with  your
firm to investigate the alleged  problem,  determine  the  severity  of  the
condition, and prepare a report of the site  investigation  and  conclusions
for transmittal to the state regulatory agency,  in  compliance  with  their
stated requirements.

As a result, you were assigned to be the  project  manager  and  coordinated
the installation of an array of groundwater monitoring wells, well  sampling
and testing, analyses and preparation of the written  report.   During  your
visits to the site, you noted that abutting  the  Industrial  Solvent  plant
property on three sides and directly across the street  were  several  other
firms  either  manufacturing  or  using  the  types  of  chemicals  used  by
Industrial Solvents.

Based on the results of the  field  monitoring  and  sampling,  Ira  Klene's
initial claim that his company was only a minor contributor to the  problem,
if at all, appeared to be substantiated.  Groundwater  elevation  monitoring
in the observation wells indicated that the direction  of  groundwater  flow
was from west (upgradient) to east (downgradient) underneath the  Industrial
Solvents  site.   Testing  of  samples  taken  from  the  monitoring   wells
indicated that the concentration of toxics in the  groundwater  were  higher
at the west side of the site, and decreased in  the  wells  further  to  the
east on the site.

You finished putting your report together yesterday  in  preparation  for  a
presentation  to  the  state  regulatory  agency  the  day  after  tomorrow,
accompanied by Mr. Klene and his  in-house  corporate  legal  counsel.   The
conclusion stated in your report is that the test results showed the  levels
of toxics in the groundwater decrease across the site  from  west  to  east,
therefore the major  portion  of  the  pollution  is  originating  with  the
industrial chemical plants further to  the  west.   If  Industrial  Solvents
Ltd. is contributing to the pollution under their site, it  can  only  be  a
minor to insignificant amount.

Early this morning you decided to visit the  Industrial  Solvents  site  one
more time,  just  to  be  certain  that  you  had  not  missed  anything  of
importance in your general description of the site  and  the  activities  in
the plant.  Since the site is not far out of your way from your home to  the
Enviroconcern offices, and you are by nature an early riser, you arrived  at
the Industrial Solvents site about 6:45 a.m., about 45  minutes  before  the
plant goes into operation on a weekday basis.  After looking  around  inside
the plant, you wandered around to the parking lot to  the  west  behind  the
building to glance at the monitoring well installations in that area.   When
you got there, you recognized Ira Klene with a rubberized raincoat over  his
suit, wearing boots and standing at one of the monitoring well caps  in  the
middle of the parking lot with his back to you.

Since he had not seen you,  you  stepped  behind  a  pickup  truck  lot  and
continued to observe Mr. Klene's actions.  It soon became  obvious  that  he
had a key to the monitoring well caps in one hand and a  hose  connected  to
the water spigot on the back of the building in the other.  In the  next  25
minutes he proceeded from well to well toward the  building,  unlocking  the
well caps, inserting the hose and allowing water to flow into each well  for
several minutes.  At first you could  not  believe  what  you  were  seeing.
Poring water into  these  downgradient  wells  causes  a  reduction  in  the
measured level of toxics in the groundwater  at  those  locations,  creating
the appearance of decreasing toxic concentrations across the site from  west
to east.

Not knowing what to do or  say,  and  not  wanting  to  confront  Mr.  Klene
directly at that moment, you crept back around the truck, waited  until  his
back was turned, and rapidly went back into the building and out  the  front
to where you had parked your car, and drove as quickly as possible  to  your
office.

As you sit at your desk you realize that all of the analytical data in  your
final report is now suspect  and  unreliable.   Your  firm's  contract  with
Industrial Solvents Ltd. contains a confidentiality clause requiring you  to
discuss  the  findings  in  your  report  with  them  before  releasing  the
information to anyone else.  The presentation for the state agency has  been
confirmed for the day after tomorrow.

You alternately stare at the wall  and  at  your  finished  report  for  the
Industrial Solvents site on your  desk  in  front  of  you.   You  then  ask
yourself the big question of the day: what do I do now?


Alternate Approaches and Survey Results for  “To  Flush  or  Not  to  Flush:
That’s the Question” (Case 1008)
1.    Call Mr. Klene, indicate  that  you  had  stopped  by  the  site  this
    morning and observed him pouring water into a number of the  monitoring
    wells near to plant building.  Ask him what he was doing that for,  and
    how long he had been doing it.  Perhaps it was a one-time occurrence.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 7%

2.    Talk  with  your  corporate  management  and  explain  what  you  have
    observed.  Let them decide what to do about the issue, if there  really
    is an issue in their estimation.   After  all,  there  may  well  be  a
    logical explanation to what you observed and you are not in a  position
    to question the actions of your company's client.  Indicate that you do
    not want to be directly involved in this  communication,  but  will  do
    whatever your management decides.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 16%

3.    Say nothing to the client or to your management.  Realize  that  since
    you were not invited, you were  probably  legally  trespassing  on  the
    property this morning, which was an error in judgment.  Your job was to
    direct the field investigations, monitoring and laboratory results, and
    to determine if a toxic problem existed based on  these  results.   You
    cannot be responsible for watching the monitoring wells  on  a  24-hour
    basis, nor are you in a position to confront the person who hired  your
    firm in the first place.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 1%

4.    Submit the report as it stands.  You know that  there  is  not  enough
    money in the project budget to redo all of the sampling and testing, as
    well as reanalyze the results.  Also, there is  no  way  Mr.  Klene  is
    going to agree to increase the budget to redo the work.   With  all  of
    the other groundwater pollutant contributors adjacent to the site, some
    variation in the contribution resulting from  the  Industrial  Solvents
    Ltd. operations is probably  insignificant  when  viewed  on  a  larger
    scale.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 0%

5.    Before submitting your report to Industrial Solvents for  review,  and
    then on to the state agency, add a qualifying disclaimer to the end  of
    your report indicating the conclusions made in the report are based  on
    the results of chemical testing of the groundwater samples obtained  at
    the site at the time, locations and depths indicated in the data.  Also
    indicate that these  results  may  vary  at  locations  away  from  the
    monitoring wells, and/or from time to time at the  specific  monitoring
    well locations.  Therefore, no other warranty, express or  implied,  is
    made or intended.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 4%

6.    Write a short memo to your project file indicating what you  observed,
    and that you have no basis for determining what,  if  any,  effect  Mr.
    Klene's actions have made on the test results shown in your report, nor
    is there any way to make such a determination without throwing out  all
    of the accumulated data and starting the sampling and  testing  program
    over from the beginning - an unwarranted action since the project scope
    of work has been completed and the project budget  has  been  depleted.
    This will stand you in good stead should there be any question  in  the
    future.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 5%

7.    Put in a confidential call to the state agency and indicate  that  you
    have reason to believe the results of the testing data  in  the  report
    they are about to receive may be suspect, but you cannot determine  the
    extent.  Realize that if the word gets out to Mr. Klene that  you  have
    done this, your company, and quite possibly  you  personally,  may  get
    sued for violating the confidentiality clause  in  your  contract  with
    Industrial Solvents Ltd.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 2%

8.    Submit the report as it is  today  to  Industrial  Solvents  Ltd.  for
    their information, in  accordance  with  the  terms  of  your  contract
    agreement with them, and indicate that the final report is due  at  the
    state agency the day after tomorrow.  Tell them that you have reason to
    believe that the results may be erroneous, and that you are willing  to
    discuss this issue, as well as  methods  of  rectifying  the  situation
    (e.g., obtaining an agreement from the state agency to delay the report
    and redoing the sampling and testing to either confirm  or  revise  the
    original results, all at additional cost to the  client).   Since  they
    are legally responsible for submitting the report to the state  agency,
    it is their decision on how to proceed.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 15%

9.    Have your management contact Industrial Solvent's  legal  counsel  and
    indicate what has happened.  Tell them that the  sampling  and  testing
    needs to be redone to confirm or revise  the  suspect  data,  and  that
    actions such as those of Mr.  Klene  cannot  be  tolerated  during  the
    repeat program.  Indicate that the locks  on  the  well  caps  will  be
    changed, and if there is any evidence or indication of  tampering  with
    the  wells  during  the  repeat  program,  your  company  will   report
    Industrial Solvents Ltd. directly to the state agency, no  matter  what
    the contract says.  Also tell  their  legal  counsel  that  the  repeat
    program will be done under your  normal  fee  schedule  for  additional
    work, and an amendment  to  the  contract  is  required  to  cover  the
    additional anticipated cost.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 42%

10.   Confer with your  management;  decide  to  tell  Mr.  Klene  what  was
    observed and that the results presented in the report are suspect.   As
    a result, your company refuses to  present  the  report  to  the  state
    agency as Industrial Solvents' consultant, and furthermore will not  do
    any more work for Industrial Solvents Ltd., realizing that you will  in
    all likelihood never get paid for the work you did on the project,  and
    may even get sued for breach of contract.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 8%


Forum Comments from Respondents
1.    It was  a  definite  error  in  judgement  to  arrive  unannounced  an
    unaccompanied at the client's site; now you know more than  you  wanted
    to.  Having screwed up, the best approach is to a) tell your  boss  and
    b)  tell  Mr.  Klene's  legal  counsel.   Mr.  Klene  may   be   acting
    independently and putting his company at risk.  The  company  may  even
    thank you for your ill-advised initiative.

2.    Tell Mr. Klene that you have found some  evidence  of  tampering  with
    the wells and that new samples will have to be  analyzed,  as  well  as
    having the locks changed on the well caps.

3.    Consult with peers in other companies by  asking  them  if  they  have
    ever been involved with falsifying test samples.

4.    I would approach Mr. Klene's legal counsel in no more  an  adversarial
    way than I needed to.  Specifically, I would  note  that  I  sympathize
    with their basic position that others contributed to the problem, and I
    would not be too heavy on Klene's actions being inappropriate  and  his
    knowing they were -- perhaps I would not let on  immediately  how  much
    had been observed.  Basically I would try to first get them to see than
    honesty is the best policy without explicitly threatening them.

5.    First, draft a letter and have it hand-delivered to Mr. Klene  letting
    him know what you saw in detail and giving him  notice  that  you  will
    send  it  to  the  state  agency  tomorrow  unless  he  "comes   klene"
    immediately.  Having the letter notarized wouldn't be a bad  idea.   Do
    not proceed with the meeting with the state unless Mr. Klene is willing
    to admit what he did at the meeting.  His actions  were  criminal;  you
    cannot afford to be involved.  The confidentiality clause  probably  is
    void in the face of overt criminal acts, so don't worry too much  about
    that.

      Second, notify your firm's attorney  and  see  what  can  be  done  to
    position the firm for cost recovery, 'cause Mr. Klene ain't  gonna  pay
    for your services.  And third, notify your  firm's  insurance  carrier,
    because they are going to be involved soon, too.   Keep  the  specifics
    vague for the present with them, but put them on a notice of a probable
    problem.

6.    As a professional engineer, you are bound by the Code  of  Ethics  for
    Engineers which clearly states that you are responsible for  protection
    of the health, safety and welfare of the public.   As  a  result,  this
    ethical  obligation  supercedes  the  confidentiality  clause  in  your
    contract  with  Industrial  Solvents,  and  you   must   disclose   the
    information to the state agency unless Mr. Klene is willing to pay  for
    a new sampling and testing program.  This does not mean, however,  that
    your firm will not  be  engaged  in  a  legal  battle  with  Industrial
    Solvents for breach of contract  if  Mr.  Klene  refuses  to  redo  the
    sampling program and pay for it.


Epilogue
You conferred with your management and decided not to  represent  Mr.  Klene
and Industrial Solvents, Ltd. at  the  meeting  with  the  state  regulatory
agency.  You notified Mr. Klene of your firm's decision and the  reason  for
it, and resigned the contract without  submitting  a  written  report.   Mr.
Klene immediately initiated a law suit  against  your  firm  for  breach  of
contract (since you  did  not  finish  and  submit  the  report).   He  then
appeared before the  state  regulatory  agency  himself  and  presented  the
accumulated field data.

After Mr. Klene's meeting with the state regulatory agency, a member of  his
own staff called the agency and  blew  the  whistle  on  Klene.   The  state
prosecuted  Industrial  Solvents  and  fined  the  company  several  hundred
thousand dollars under civil law proceedings.  In addition,  they  sued  Mr.
Klene in criminal proceedings, resulting in his conviction  and  release  on
probation.

However, the law suit initiated by Mr. Klene with your  firm  continued  for
years, and was finally resolved by an out-of-court settlement in which  your
firm paid $10,000, and never recovered any of  the  $25,000  consulting  fee
for the original project.

