

                    Design/Build – a TE/STI Relationship
                                 (Case 1040)


The mission of the National Institute for Engineering Ethics  (NIEE)  is  to
promote ethics in engineering practice  and  education.   One  component  of
NIEE  is  the  Applied  Ethics  in  Professional  Practice  (AEPP)  program,
providing free engineering  ethics  cases  for  educational  purposes.   The
following case may be reprinted if it is provided  free  of  charge  to  the
engineer or  student.   Written  permission  is  required  if  the  case  is
reprinted for resale.  For more cases and other NIEE  Products  &  Services,
contact  the  National  Institute  for  Engineering   Ethics,   Texas   Tech
University, www.niee.org..  (All reprints must contain these statements)

The Case:
Ethan Roberts, P.E. is the principal in charge  of  design  for  intelligent
transportation systems, one  of  many  specialty  services  that  his  firm,
Tecxtrans Engineers, offers in  the  transportation  market  sector.   These
intelligent   transportation   systems   encompass   a   broad   range    of
communications-based  information  and  electronics  technologies  aimed  at
relieving congestion and improving traffic safety.
Tecxtrans has historically offered services in the public  sector  and  only
within the context of traditional design-bid-build (D/B/B) project  delivery
agreements.   This  is  because  Federal  statutes  require   that   highway
construction contracts be awarded competitively  to  the  lowest  responsive
bidder.  In  such  cases,  Tecxtrans’  professional  services  are  procured
through a  qualifications-based  selection  process;  whereas,  construction
contracts are competitively bid.
But in an effort to streamline delivery of a new intelligent  transportation
system for the City of Franklin – a  large  metropolitan  community  in  the
northeastern United States – the state department of  transportation,  EDOT,
opted to use a design-build (D/B) contract.   Through  careful  negotiation,
EDOT got  a  ruling  that  the  Franklin  project  could  be  viewed  as  an
experimental project and  that  D/B  would  satisfy  existing  statutes  and
regulations as long as the project was  awarded  using  competitive  bidding
procedures.
So it happened that Tecxtrans Engineers teamed up  with  Specialty  Transit,
Inc., an out-of-state construction contractor, to pursue the  project  as  a
partnership-type joint venture (TE/STI).
The decision to pursue the project under a D/B  agreement  was  a  difficult
one for Ethan.  On the one hand, Ethan felt that by getting into D/B he  was
taking on undesirable risk.  Convinced that Tecxtrans held the inside  track
in terms of qualifications, and owing to the  fact  that  EDOT  was  one  of
Tecxtrans’ flagship clients, Ethan was sure his firm would  be  short-listed
in a traditional D/B/B contract.  From this position of strength, he  didn’t
relish  the  idea  of  worrying  about  construction  risks.   Additionally,
Tecxtrans had no  D/B  experience,  so  Ethan’s  team  was  unaccustomed  to
serving as a partner with the contractor.
On the other hand, Ethan recognized the limitations of D/B/B, and could  see
how D/B holds the potential to streamline project delivery.   In  fact,  the
trend toward D/B for  private  contracts  had  been  growing  steadily,  and
because of this, Ethan felt it would be in Tecxtrans’  interest  to  explore
D/B  teaming  arrangements  in  the  public  sector,  simply   to   maintain
marketplace competitiveness.  Who better to serve  clients  in  this  manner
than a respected firm like Tecxtrans?  By this line of thinking,  Ethan  was
practically obligated to pursue the D/B project delivery option.

The  biggest  challenge  was  to  find   the   right   contractor   partner.
Fortunately, Ethan had been sought out and approached by Specialty  Transit,
Inc., a well-known and successful  transportation  contractor.   With  their
long experience  in  D/B  contracting  in  other  regions  of  the  country,
Specialty Transit was interested in the Franklin project for  at  least  two
reasons: (1) this project represented a  move  into  a  new  region  of  the
country strategic to Specialty Transit’s growth, and (2)  they  were  highly
qualified   to   do   infrastructure   type-construction   associated   with
intelligent transportation systems.  For Specialty Transit, the key  was  to
find the right engineering firm, one who enjoyed  the  trust  of  the  owner
(EDOT) and –  equally  important  –  a  firm  with  the  appropriate  design
expertise.  By partnering with Tecxtrans, Specialty Transit felt they had  a
“marriage made in heaven.”

The project pre-proposal meeting was  the  wedding  that  brought  Tecxtrans
Engineering  and  Specialty  Transit,  Inc.  together.   Yes,  the   teaming
negotiations were dynamic –Ethan’s legal staff considered them  a  nightmare
due  to  the  complex  contractual,  insurance  and  organizational  issues.
However, Ethan was able to get quite a bit of mileage out of the  fact  that
his firm was, without  question,  the  most  qualified  local  design  firm.
Recognizing  that  Tecxtrans’  expertise  and  relationship  with  EDOT  was
critical to any contractor’s  success,  Ethan  negotiated  a  50/50  profit-
sharing arrangement with Specialty Transit’s project manager, Marc  Stanton.


Marc was not  happy  about  this.   His  perspective  was  that  contractors
generally make considerably more  profit  than  engineers  do  on  the  same
project, and he had no desire to split  profits  evenly  with  an  engineer.
Marc felt this was far too high a price to pay for gaining  Tecxtrans’  help
in marketing.  But Ethan  held  firm,  and  largely  due  to  the  strategic
importance of the project, the parties reached an agreement and  the  TE/STI
partnership was formed.  Marc was the managing partner of the joint  venture
and was responsible for Specialty Transit’s  work,  while  Ethan  served  as
Tecxtrans’ principal.  The general understanding was  that  Tecxtrans  would
be responsible for design and Specialty Transit  would  be  responsible  for
construction; the issue of what to do in case of a design conflict  was  not
explicitly addressed.

The  design-build  procurement   approach   required   that   EDOT   provide
prospective bidders with a set  of  functional  requirements  detailing  the
various capabilities of the  completed  system.  EDOT  provided  a  detailed
project description to the  bidders,  including  corridors  for  deployment,
functional requirements for equipment, and hardware and  software  interface
design.  A multi-step process was followed to  select  the  D/B  contractor,
the ultimate objective being to provide EDOT with the best value  for  their
investment.
Quite frankly, it was here – in the bid phase – that Ethan started  to  have
doubts about executing the D/B  arrangement.   For  example,  Ethan  noticed
that various details in the EDOT-provided project information left  much  to
the imagination.  Technically these were not errors or omissions,  but  were
points open to interpretation that might turn out  to  be  substantial  cost
and/or quality factors in the completed project.  In D/B/B,  Ethan,  as  the
owner’s representative, would have discussed these issues  with  EDOT.   But
in D/B, Ethan’s relationship with the owner and contractor  were  different.
Not sure about how to proceed, Ethan sought out Marc’s counsel.
Based on his long experience with D/B projects,  Marc  informed  Ethan  that
the D/B customer (in this case, EDOT) has to realize that the engineer  will
be aligned with the contractor and will share in the profits and  losses  of
the  venture.  Therefore  the  engineer’s  fiduciary  duties  are   to   the
contractor, not the customer.  Recognizing Ethan’s struggle with this  shift
in roles, Marc reminded Ethan that if the engineer offers any advice to  the
customer, it should be with the open understanding that such advice may  not
be wholly objective.  In fact, when the engineer is in  a  D/B  relationship
with the customer, it would be improper if not deceptive  for  the  engineer
to mislead  the  customer  into  regarding  the  engineer  as  an  impartial
advisor.
Marc further explained that D/B is not much,  if  any,  different  from  the
contractor’s usual relationship with the  customer.   That  is,  contractors
often give valuable construction advice to their customers.  In most  cases,
the recipient  of  the  advice  realizes  that  it  might  not  be  entirely
objective. Some advice given by the contractor might  be  considered  to  be
like a sales pitch and is accepted as such, as long as  it  does  not  cross
the thin line  into  misrepresentation.   Further,  in  D/B  the  engineer’s
financial  position  is  very  close  to  the  contractor’s  and  in  direct
opposition to that of the customer.
Acknowledging Marc’s  experience  in  the  matter,  and  the  truth  of  the
situation with respect to D/B, Ethan  reluctantly  agreed  to  say  nothing.
Ultimately the TE/STI partnership was awarded  the  Franklin  contract,  the
notice-to-proceed was given, and work began.
The project is now approaching 85 percent completion, and Ethan reflects  on
the  cooperative  relationship  between  his  firm  and  Specialty  Transit.
“Cooperation” somehow doesn’t adequately capture the effort –  it  has  been
more like cohabitation, and it seems pretty clear  to  Ethan  that  Marc  is
accustomed to wearing the pants in the relationship.   With  the  gentleness
of a steamroller, Marc has aggressively pushed the design schedule  to  make
project milestones.  Some lessons have been painful, but  Ethan  knows  this
is not all bad.  Projects have budgets and deadlines, and Marc  has  reasons
for displaying statements like “Hurry every time you think  about  it,”  and
“It is better to seek forgiveness than permission,”  on  the  walls  of  his
office.  Granted, Ethan has not conceded  design  responsibility,  but  only
through  vigilance  and  conflict  has  Ethan’s  engineering  staff  avoided
becoming unacceptably subservient.
And so it continues.  Today, though, Ethan has encountered  a  more  serious
issue.   While  reviewing  subcontractor  submittals  for  compliance   with
specifications,  Ethan  notices  that  Marc  has  authorized  several  field
changes that Ethan does not at all agree  with.  In  the  struggle  to  keep
costs  within  the  guaranteed  maximum,  Marc  has  apparently  substituted
electronics hardware that Ethan sees  as  being  inferior  –  tantamount  to
degradation of  the  quality  of  materials  and  design.  Ethan  is  deeply
disturbed because the substitution has occurred on  the  very  same  systems
that he discussed with Marc during the bid phase – the ones that were  “open
to interpretation.”  Clearly, Marc is interpreting as a  “contractor”  would
– in his own favor.
But therein lies the rub – for all intents and  purposes,  Ethan’s  firm  is
the contractor now.  And based on previous interactions with Marc, Ethan  is
painfully aware that design conflicts are not  expressly  addressed  in  the
TE/STI  partnership  agreement.   Further,  the  engineer’s  usual  role  as
adjudicator  of  disputes  between  the  owner  and  contractor   would   be
inappropriate in the D/B setting.
Ethan ponders the fact that in D/B the engineer has no incentive  to  report
this type of construction  irregularity  to  the  customer.   But  Ethan  is
concerned about maintaining the trust of EDOT and about his  own  reputation
for designing a quality project.  Ethan knows he has to learn to operate  in
the milieu of contracting as a business and not as an impartial  advisor  to
the owner.  This may be a gray area but  there  definitely  are  two  sides.
Ethan is torn between his professional obligation to serve EDOT and his  own
financial interests – not to mention his legal obligations – to fulfill  his
responsibilities as a partner in the joint venture.
What should Ethan do?
Alternate Approaches and Survey Results
Note: This case is based in part on: “Design/Build:  What’s  it  all  about?
Where do you fit in?” by Arthur O’Leary, Design Cost Data, July/August  2001
<http://www.dcd.com/oleary/oleary_ja2001.html>
Alternative Approaches
   1. Celebrate success, happily.  Ethan needs to loosen up  and  count  the
      revenue.  He got into this business to earn a profit, and if he  stays
      out of Marc’s way, a handsome profit is what he will  make.   TE/STI’s
      success is a blessing, not a sin.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 0%
   2. Meditate on success, pragmatically. EDOT’s decision to go D/B was done
      with their eyes wide open.  So who is Ethan to say that the value  the
      TE/STI joint venture is delivering to EDOT in terms  of  schedule  and
      budget savings does not overshadow any potential quality  concern?  No
      one gets to have it both  ways.   Perhaps  EDOT  isn’t  getting  every
      measure of quality that might emerge from D/B/B, but they are  getting
      what they wanted and what they paid for.  There is no problem here.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 0%
   3. Live with success, guiltily.  If Ethan does nothing,  it  seems  clear
      that installation of the inferior electronic gear will, at a  minimum,
      increase system maintenance.  So yes, Ethan is right to feel that EDOT
      won’t get the project they could have had. And yes,  Ethan  stands  to
      make more profit under the circumstances.  But it was EDOT, not Ethan,
      who chose D/B and opened the door to such possibilities.  It  may  not
      seem right, but Marc is only playing by the rules and Ethan  has  done
      nothing wrong.  Best to let it alone.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 0%
   4. Talk to Marc, openly.  The TE/STI joint venture  simply  cannot  serve
      EDOT well if Ethan and Marc do not communicate.  Ethan should  have  a
      heart-to-heart with Marc and  explain  his  thoughts,  questions,  and
      concerns about the design change.  Further, Ethan should trust Marc to
      respond professionally and do the right thing  in  view  of  the  best
      available data, not the least of which is Ethan’s expert opinion.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 35%
   5.  Challenge  Marc,  directly.   Conflict  is  the  stuff   of   healthy
      relationships, and Ethan must “push back.”  Marc needs to be  reminded
      that “design” comes before “build” in D/B. Since Ethan is  responsible
      for the design aspect of the project, Ethan alone approves changes  to
      components of the system.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 11%
   6. Bring in the experts, quickly.  Situations like  this  should  not  be
      handled in  isolation.   Ethan  and  Marc  should  retain  an  outside
      engineering firm to perform a peer review of the systems  in  question
      to determine their adequacy, and also offer a recommendation  on  what
      should be done contractually relative to EDOT.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 11%
   7. Negotiate with EDOT, aggressively.  Ethan must once again mobilize his
      considerable negotiating skills to help Marc see past short term  gain
      long enough to bring the quality issue to EDOT.   Together  they  must
      help EDOT see the value of the higher  quality  electronics,  and  get
      EDOT to pay for this.  Of course the risk is that EDOT may feel  Ethan
      and Marc are conspiring to submit an  unjustified  change  order,  and
      this will foul the relationship.  But the risks of  poor  quality  are
      much greater.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 11%
   8. Bear the burden, nobly.  If anyone is innocent in the ongoing conflict
      that Marc and Ethan are experiencing, it is  EDOT.   EDOT’s  interests
      (and by implication, the public’s interests) should be held paramount.
       Knowing that Marc will not likely back down from  his  position,  but
      feeling that it is critical to get the original  equipment  installed,
      Ethan should agree to give up a portion of his share of the profits to
      offset the cost of the better components.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 5%
   9. Cost share with EDOT, equally.  These  kinds  of  quality  issues  are
      intrinsic to contracting in general and to this transportation project
      in particular.  Responsibility is really a matter of perspective.   If
      Ethan or Marc or EDOT were  to  say,  “Not  my  problem,”  this  leads
      nowhere.  But if each party were to view the situation  as  everyone’s
      problem, they can take ownership and forge some type  of  cost-sharing
      agreement.  Everyone will have to pay something, but everyone will get
      something, too.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 19%
  10. Conspire with EDOT, quietly.  It is not hard  to  see  that  when  the
      project is over, Ethan and EDOT will still be in town, but  Marc  will
      not.  It is clearly in both EDOT’s and  Ethan’s  interest  to  deliver
      exceptional quality to this project.  Contractual  obligations  aside,
      Ethan’s ultimate responsibility is to the public, so Ethan must go  to
      EDOT to apprise them of the inferior system Marc intends  to  install.
      Thus empowered, EDOT can direct a solution that both  protects  EDOT’s
      (the public’s) interests and rewards Ethan for his loyalty.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 8%
Forum Comments from Respondents
   1. This is a  very  difficult  situation  for  Ethan.   In  essence,  the
      struggle is whether each of the parties in the relationship trusts the
      other. Does Ethan trust Marc to look out for his (Ethan's)  reputation
      with the client rather than just the bottom line?  Do Ethan  and  Marc
      trust EDOT to own up to the fact that if they want high quality,  they
      will have to pay for high quality?  Does Marc trust Ethan  to  protect
      his profit? Does EDOT trust Ethan and Marc  to  deliver  this  project
      faster, cheaper and better?  Communication is the means by which these
      questions can be answered, and the place to start  is  a  conversation
      between Ethan and Marc.

   2. Changes are being made which can lead to inferior systems, potentially
      violating the  contract.   No  procedures  have  been  established  to
      formally document or negotiate such changes.  Failing to address  this
      issue  may  result  ultimately  in  changes  which  could   jeopardize
      reliability and safety.  Further, Marc  is  clearly  behaving  towards
      Ethan's firm aggressively, not as a partnership.  This can  only  lead
      to larger problems as each partner's  vision  of  the  project  drifts
      further apart.  This is clearly a communication  issue  that  must  be
      resolved.  Once that is done, the specific issue at  hand,  which  may
      violate the contract with EDOT, should be dealt with given  the  tools
      for communication that are established.

   3. As D/B processes emerge and evolve, all parties (Engineer, Contractor,
      Owner) will need to embrace the realities of the  new  model.   Within
      the new Engineer/Contractor relationship, neither party will  be  able
      to claim an absolute authority regarding some  (most?)  decisions.  In
      these  cases,  these  "partners"  must  be  open  to  evaluation   and
      discussion of inevitable  problems  and  disagreements.  The  Engineer
      cannot abdicate his responsibility in the name of profit, nor can  the
      contractor choose to ignore the inevitable need to balance quality and
      costs. Realistically these same choices are made by  both  parties  in
      the D/B/B process, but perhaps in  a  different  sequence.   Likewise,
      within the  new  Engineer-Contractor/Owner  relationship,  there  will
      likely be numerous cases where clear  contractual  language  does  not
      exist to resolve every issue. If there is not opportunity for the open
      discussion of uncertainties and omissions, then neither party will  be
      able to realize the potential of the D/B  process.  Again,  this  same
      reality exists within the D/B/B process.

Comments from Board of Review Members
   1. If the substituted electronics hardware  might  result  in  a  health,
      safety or welfare problem for the public, then I believe Ethan has the
      responsibility to talk  with  EDOT  about  the  substitution.  Such  a
      situation overrides the financial and  contractual  agreement  he  has
      with Specialty Transit, Inc.  Poor Ethan. He could  lose  either  way.
      His reputation is either tarnished with STI or  with  EDOT.  From  his
      interactions with Marc, I doubt whether Ethan would want to work  with
      STI  in  the  future,  but  he  should  want  to  keep  his   positive
      relationship with EDOT. Ethan, don’t make a  bad  situation  worse  by
      losing your firm’s good reputation with EDOT.

   2. Other issues are at stake besides the interrelationship between system
      quality and the public health, safety and welfare.  The  TE/STI  Joint
      Venture, Ethan’s and  Marc’s  long-term  reputations,  future  project
      opportunities, and short-term profits are also  valid  considerations.
      As the project designer,  Ethan  should  investigate  the  performance
      aspects of the various changes and make his  own  determination  about
      which changes will be acceptable, which are not acceptable, and  which
      are borderline.  Ethan must then negotiate with Marc in  the  interest
      of all parties with a view to all aspects of the situation,  not  just
      the ones that are closest to him.  It is critical that Ethan and  Marc
      be together on this.  From a position of  unity,  they  must  initiate
      conversation with EDOT to resolve the matter.

   3. Ethan has first to come to grips with the realities of Design/Build.
         • His responsibility is to provide a design that complies with all
           applicable codes for the quoted price and  that  is  serviceable
           for the intended use. The construction industry  is  held  to  a
           standard of serviceability, i.e., make  it  work  based  on  the
           scope of work and the contract terms and conditions.
         • Designer preference for specific manufacturers and models has to
           be tempered by objectively looking at  the  alternates,  putting
           aside the requirement for the “best” (in  whose  judgment?)  and
           making an informed judgment on the  viability  of  the  specific
           alternative based on the above statement.


      Ethan will have to present an argument  to  Marc  from  the  following
standpoints:
         • The equipment has a bad maintenance history.
         • The equipment has  a  poor  warranty  history/reputation,  i.e.,
           warranties  will  be  honored  but  only  after   much   hassle.
           Warranties cost the  contractor  because  the  removal  of  such
           equipment,  shipment  back  to   the   manufacturer,   and   re-
           installation are not covered by the supplier’s  warranty.  These
           last items have a cost associated with them that the  contractor
           has to bear. How was this addressed in the cost sharing split in
           the joint venture agreement?
         • The reputation of the joint venture for future work,  with  this
           client and others, will hinge on the client’s satisfaction  with
           this project.


      If Marc does not relent, Ethan can:
         • Check with EDOT a few months after the project is completed  and
           find out how satisfied they are with the project.
         • Discontinue the partnership/joint venture based on the  response
           from EDOT to the customer satisfaction inquiry.
         • Meet with EDOT after this project is finished and explain why he
           was not an advocate for them.
         •  Apologize  to  EDOT  for  not  conducting   a   due   diligence
           investigation into STI’s reputation.
   4. Like it or not, Design/Build is here  to  stay.   Unfortunately,  this
      method  of  project  delivery   tends   to   cloud   the   traditional
      responsibilities  of  the  Engineer,  now  that  the  client,  through
      contractual obligation, is the Contractor, rather than the Owner.  The
      ethical responsibility to “act as a faithful agent or trustee” of each
      client can easily be at odds with  the  fundamental  charge  to  “hold
      paramount the safety, health, and welfare of  the  public”  (see  ASCE
      Code of Ethics).  In this particular case, it  isn’t  obvious  whether
      the substitution of the inferior electronic system represents a threat
      to the safety of the public, or merely  a  decrease  in  quality  that
      will, at worst, increase the project’s life cycle cost to  the  Owner.
      If the poor quality components place the public at risk, then  Ethan’s
      choice is clear – he must do everything in his power  to  ensure  that
      the  proper  equipment  is  installed,  regardless  of  the  potential
      consequences  to  Tecxtrans  or  the  TE/STI  partnership.    If   the
      ramifications are only economic, then Ethan has more of a dilemma.  He
      must weigh the cost of the higher quality components against the value
      of his firm’s reputation.  In this scenario,  it  may  be  prudent  to
      propose some solution to Marc that would allow the better equipment to
      be installed, but with Tecxtrans shouldering the additional  financial
      burden.  Regardless of the course followed, Ethan must have  his  team
      of lawyers close the loophole in their contractual language  that  led
      to this problem, so future D/B partnerships do  not  lead  to  similar
      challenges.


