
                      All Trussed Up and No Place to Go
                                 (Case 1023)

The mission of the National Institute for Engineering Ethics  (NIEE)  is  to
promote ethics in engineering practice  and  education.   One  component  of
NIEE  is  the  Applied  Ethics  in  Professional  Practice  (AEPP)  program,
providing free engineering  ethics  cases  for  educational  purposes.   The
following case may be reprinted if it is provided  free  of  charge  to  the
engineer or  student.   Written  permission  is  required  if  the  case  is
reprinted for resale.  For more cases and other NIEE  Products  &  Services,
contact  the  National  Institute  for  Engineering   Ethics,   Texas   Tech
University, www.niee.org..  (All reprints must contain these statements)

The Case:
You are  a  senior  engineer  for  a  well-known  and  respected  structural
engineering firm in Dallas, Texas.  Your  firm  has  been  involved  in  the
structural design of a number of high-rise buildings  in  the  Dallas  area,
and has also provided structural engineering services as a subconsultant  to
project design companies focused on large public  works  projects,  such  as
bridges, sewage treatment plants and airports.   In  this  regard,  you  are
aware that a significant public works project is  being  planned  nearby  in
Fort Worth.  The project will require a considerable  amount  of  structural
engineering design work.

You are contacted by I. B. Shaker, Vice President for Development of  Moover
Design Consultants, Ltd., which is a national public  works  project  design
firm headquartered on lower Fifth Avenue in New  York  City.   Shaker  tells
you that they are committed to putting together an outstanding Statement  of
Qualifications (SOQ) and Proposal in order  to  be  selected  as  the  prime
designer for the proposed Fort Worth project.  Since your firm  is  probably
the best known structural engineer  in  the  area,  Moover  Design  Services
would like you to join their team in pursuing the  project.   Also,  due  to
the intense competition for the design contract, they would like  your  firm
to enter into an exclusive arrangement with them whereby you  agree  not  to
be on any other design teams competing for the work.

This is not an unusual request for such  a  project,  and  after  conferring
with your associates in the firm, you decide to join the Moover Design  team
as their structural engineering subconsultant for the project.  One of  your
associates indicates that  Moover  is  known  to  have  its  own  structural
engineering group in-house in New York City, so you call  I.  B.  Shaker  on
the telephone and mention  this  to  him,  asking  what  role  his  in-house
structural group will play in the project.  He tells you that his  firm  has
decided that in order to be awarded the project design, especially in  light
of the heavy competition anticipated from at least six  other  public  works
design firms from Seattle  to  Atlanta,  they  will  need  to  team  with  a
reputable  Dallas/Fort  Worth-based  subconsultant  to   demonstrate   local
commitment to the project.  As a result,  their  in-house  structural  group
will be called on only to review your work from  time  to  time  during  the
project design.

The selection process for the project designer proceeds without  delay;  the
Moover Design team is one of four A/E firms short-listed  for  the  project;
you are asked to attend the interview in front of  the  selection  committee
and make some comments as a member of the Moover team; when  you  arrive  at
the presentation you realize that you know virtually all of the  members  of
the selection committee due to your interaction with them on  an  individual
basis for  a  number  of  projects  in  the  past;  your  presentation  goes
exceptionally well (even though I. B. Shaker  appeared  nervous  and  didn't
know that Dallas is closer to Fort Worth than Austin is).

Several days later you receive word from  the  agency  funding  the  project
that the Moover team has been selected  as  the  design  consultant.   As  a
result, you submit a scope of work and your estimated fee to Moover for  the
structural engineering portion of the work and are told  that  you  will  be
contacted about getting started once the final contract has been  negotiated
between Moover and the  funding  agency.   Due  to  the  complexity  of  the
project, your fee is estimated to be $435,000.

Your attention is diverted to a number of other projects which  come  up  in
the next several weeks, so it  is  not  until  two  months  later  that  you
realize you have not heard from  Moover,  and  call  I.  B.  Shaker  on  the
telephone.  His secretary tells you that he is in San  Francisco  chasing  a
large sewer tunnel design project, and won't be able to  return  your  call.
Instead, she  transfers  you  to  Chuck  Cleaver,  Moover's  design  project
manager, who tells you that they have started on the design, their  in-house
structural group is having no problem doing the work and if  they  need  any
additional assistance during the life of  the  design  contract,  they  will
call you (but don't call them).  You are astonished at both the content  and
tone of the response.

The following week you attend a national engineering society meeting at  the
Anatole Hotel in Dallas.  During the cocktail hour you happen  to  run  into
an acquaintance who used to work in Dallas, but now is in New York City,  by
happenstance working for Moover Design  Consultants.   After  a  couple  (or
three) beers, he tells you that although most people don't know  it,  it  is
company policy with Moover to bring local engineers onto  their  teams  when
they are competing for work in specific cities outside of New York in  order
to show local expertise and a commitment to the  area.   However,  once  the
project has been awarded to Moover, the real work is done in-house, and  the
subconsultants who were listed on the team are ignored, or  sometimes  given
a very small amount of work to do.  After all, why not keep the  profits  at
home in the New York office?

What, if anything, do you do?


Alternate Approaches and Survey Results for “All Trussed Up and No Place  to
Go” (Case 1023)

1.    Leak the story to the Dallas-Fort Worth Inquirer, then send a copy  of
    the article to Chuck Cleaver, I. B. Shaker and the president of  Moover
    Design Consultants in New  York  City  and  wait  to  see  if  anything
    happens.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 2%

2.    Send a hefty bill to I. B. Shaker for all of the  time  you  and  your
    firm spent in contributing to the SOQ, work scope preparation  for  the
    proposal, interview preparation and rehearsal, as well as your time for
    the presentation before the selection committee.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 17%

3.    Since you knew most of the people on the  funding  agency’s  selection
    committee, make a few telephone calls to these people and inquire  what
    you should do about the situation, in the agency’s  opinion,  realizing
    that they may say they have no control over the amount of work actually
    given to the subconsultants for the project.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 10%

4.    Find out who the funding agency’s project manager is  and  arrange  to
    have lunch with him/her.  Express your frustration and concern, and ask
    if there is any reasonable course of action you can take.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 10%

5.    Send a certified letter to I. B. Shaker stating that the current  work
    arrangement is not the way it was agreed prior to the submittal of  the
    proposal  and  the  interview,  and  as  a  consequence  your  firm  is
    terminating any relationship with the project.  Put a carbon copy  note
    to the project funding agency at the bottom of the letter, and  send  a
    copy of the letter to the director of the funding agency.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 31%

6.    Have your corporate attorney file a  legal  complaint  and  notice  of
    intention to  sue  Moover  Design  Consultants  for  breach  of  verbal
    contract, defamation of professional reputation,  loss  of  anticipated
    profit and violation  of  the  extent  of  local  design  participation
    implied to the selection committee.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 13%

7.    Make sure to tell the story of how badly your firm  has  been  treated
    by Moover to anyone who will listen at all of the professional  society
    meetings you and your people attend over the next year.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 2%

8.    Contact your acquaintance who is working for Moover in New  York  City
    to determine if any of the structural engineers working on the  project
    are registered  professional  engineers  (with  structural  engineering
    specialty) in the State of Texas.  If there are none, contact the Texas
    State Board of Registration and file a complaint against Moover for not
    having the structural engineering design work performed and/or reviewed
    by a Texas registered professional engineer – a violation of the law.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 13%

9.    Contact your old high school classmate,  Guido,  who  is  involved  in
    some kind of business in New York City to see if he can arrange to make
    an offer to Moover they can’t refuse.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 3%


Forum Comments from Respondents

1.    Although you did not sign any contracts  with  Moover  for  the  work,
    send them an invoice immediately for all the work your firm believed it
    would perform for the project.  Finally, promise I. B. Shaker  that  if
    the situation is not rectified immediately, you will initiate your best
    whistle-blowing tactics, including press releases  and  contacting  the
    funding agency.  You must protect yourself, but you also must represent
    and protect your profession.

2.    Call the Texas Board of Registration for Engineers.   Inform  them  of
    the  consistent  fraudulent  and  questionable  behavior   Moover   has
    displayed as it has appeared to you.

      You should consult a lawyer in order to get the most money out of  the
    deal.  After talking with both the Moover project manager (Cleaver) and
    your old acquaintance in their firm, it is obvious that this  has  been
    their intention all along.  You should inform I. B. Shaker before  this
    action is taken, so that he has a chance to recommit  to  the  original
    agreement.

3.    You should see if your friend’s story is legitimate by  checking  into
    Moover’s history of awarding subcontracts.  If it  is  true,  then  ask
    your own company line management what action should be taken.

4.    Maybe you  have  not  heard  the  other  side  of  the  story  in  its
    completeness.  Attempt to contract  Shaker  personally.   Go  into  the
    discussion with an open mind.  If there was deliberate  fraud,  send  a
    certified letter (as in Alternate 5) and think about initiating a legal
    complaint [even though no contracts for your work had been signed  with
    Moover – ed.].

5.    I would track down I. B. Shaker  wherever  he  is  and  ask  him  what
    gives, and make it known that I intend that he uphold his  end  of  the
    deal.  If he does not, I would approach key individuals at the  funding
    agency, let them know what is going on and ask for their  intervention.
    My experience has been that local involvement is usually a major  issue
    with large projects for public works agencies.  The proposal  submitted
    by Moover and the interview materials likely  documented  the  expected
    role and involvement of your firm.

6.    If Shaker and his firm do not rectify the situation in a  satisfactory
    manner, you should have your corporate attorney file a breach of verbal
    contract suit in Dallas.  This will require Moover to defend themselves
    on your turf and also could impact their authorization to  do  business
    in Texas if they are found at fault.

7.    You should reference the RFP (Request for Proposal)  for  the  project
    to see what it had  to  say  about  such  “bait  and  switch”  tactics.
    Agencies are getting wise to this gambit and many of them are inserting
    standard language that, “those who show up to make a  presentation  had
    damn well better be visible on the design team.”  If the RFP  addresses
    the use of subconsultants listed in the submitted proposal, and  if  it
    was made clear during the interview that the selection committee wanted
    the presenters to be on the design team, then a simple  telephone  call
    to your friends at the funding agency selection committee  might  solve
    the problem.

8.    You should document the  telephone  conversation  with  Cleaver  in  a
    letter to Cleaver indicating that as you understand it, Moover does not
    intend to use your firm to anywhere near the extent that was  indicated
    to the funding agency in the proposal and  interview.   Realizing  that
    Cleaver will probably ignore the letter, you should then send a  letter
    informing Moover and the funding agency that as a  result  of  Moover’s
    actions, your firm is no longer a part of the design firm.  The funding
    agency needs to be aware of the  situation  so  when  mistakes  in  the
    design crop up, your firm is not  held  liable  (morally  or  legally).
    It’s lay it on the line time.

9.    You should write I. B. Shaker and express your  understanding  of  the
    situation  and  your  disappointment  at  the  behavior  and  lack   of
    professional ethics of the company and its employees.  You  could  also
    let your professional colleagues know what had occurred to put them  on
    the alert in case Shaker approaches them  on  future  proposals.   Much
    beyond that, though, and you’ll be slinking down into  the  slime  with
    Shaker and you and your company do not need that.  Stick to the ethical
    high ground and avoid the mud-slinging.

10.   You have learned a most valuable lesson.  Henceforth, you  should  use
    written agreements or a MOU (Memorandum of Understanding) whenever  you
    are collaborating with a firm you haven’t  worked  with  previously  or
    don’t know very well.

11.   You should chalk this up to a learning experience.  The  next  time  a
    large out-of-town firm wants you to subcontract to give  them  a  local
    presence, you will get a written agreement in  advance  and  you  won’t
    agree to be “exclusive” until you receive a retainer.

