

                            I’d Rather Be Fishing
                                 (Case 1039)

The mission of the National Institute for Engineering Ethics  (NIEE)  is  to
promote ethics in engineering practice  and  education.   One  component  of
NIEE  is  the  Applied  Ethics  in  Professional  Practice  (AEPP)  program,
providing free engineering  ethics  cases  for  educational  purposes.   The
following case may be reprinted if it is provided  free  of  charge  to  the
engineer or  student.   Written  permission  is  required  if  the  case  is
reprinted for resale.  For more cases and other NIEE  Products  &  Services,
contact  the  National  Institute  for  Engineering   Ethics,   Texas   Tech
University, www.niee.org..  (All reprints must contain these statements)
The Case:
Shariq Farhoud, CET is  a  senior  field  technician  recently  employed  by
Everclere Consultants, Inc.,  an  environmental  engineering  firm.   Having
formerly worked as a quality control  technician  for  a  large  remediation
contractor, Shariq is highly-trained, safety conscious, and  well  aware  of
the sampling methods, testing protocol, chain-of-custody  requirements,  and
the  analytical  chemical  tests  frequently  required  during  clean-up  of
urban/industrial sites.
Life is definitely better as a consultant.   For  starters,  there  is  less
travel, and some weekends off.  Also, since joining Everclere, the  work  is
familiar – he routinely performs quality assurance testing not  unlike  what
he performed as a contractor, which consists of monitoring  and  documenting
the clean up of impacted sites.  And even more important for Shariq,  he  no
longer  faces  daily  pressure  from  job  superintendents  to   “wink”   at
questionable environmental clean-up practices  for  the  sake  of  increased
production.  Not that  he  ever  compromised  himself  –  Shariq’s  personal
morals would not  allow  this  –  but  it  is  nice  to  have  some  relief.
Consulting engineers, after all, must not only comply with the law  but  are
also bound by strict codes of ethics.
It is the Friday before Memorial  Day  and  Shariq  is  looking  forward  to
mountain biking with friends over the long weekend.   The  weather  forecast
shows excellent conditions,.  As  is  his  custom,  Shariq  arrives  at  the
office at 6:00am, well  ahead  of  the  engineers.   Going  over  the  day’s
planned activities, he muses that it will  be  hard  to  get  anything  done
today.  By the looks of the  schedule,  some  –  including  his  supervisor,
Chuck Ashby, PE – are already heading to the lake for an early start on  the
holiday weekend.
From the paperwork on Shariq’s desk, it seems that Chuck  worked  late  last
night, getting things in order so he could take off early without  a  guilty
conscience.  On personalized notepaper showing  the  watermark  image  of  a
largemouth bass and the inscription, “I’d rather be fishing,” –  words  that
Chuck scribbled out and replaced with  “Gone  Fishing!”  –  Chuck  has  left
Shariq his instructions for the day.
The note explains that one of Everclere’s clients has a property  for  which
Chuck has proposed to provide “preliminary reconnaissance.”  This means  (a)
go to the site, (b) have a look  around,  (c)  collect  a  few  samples  for
possible testing, (d) make personal notes for the  file,  and  (e)  identify
first impression conclusions that should be verbally reported to Chuck.
The objective in offering this service,  Chuck  explains,  is  to  give  the
client  a  preliminary  idea  about  the  environmental  condition  of   the
property.  Further, Chuck directs Shariq to give him a call  to  report  his
findings as soon as Shariq returns  from  the  site.   The  reason  for  the
telephone call is  that  Chuck  and  the  client’s  representative  will  be
spending the day together – “relationship building” out at the  lake  –  and
Chuck wants to impress the client with the  speed  at  which  Everclere  can
deliver results.
Thinking  that  when  it  comes  to  client  relationships,  engineers   and
contractors seem to have a lot in common,  Shariq  travels  to  the  project
site and performs the reconnaissance.  Among other things, he  observes  two
drums on the property, and per Chuck’s instructions, Shariq gathers  samples
from these drums, properly stowing the samples in an ice chest he  keeps  in
his truck for this very purpose.  Completing his notes,  Shariq  returns  to
the office and makes his verbal report to Chuck.
Certain that Chuck’s cell phone  is  picking  up  the  telltale  strains  of
jukebox music from  the  “Fisherman’s  Lounge”  in  the  background,  Shariq
informs Chuck of his  observations  in  general,  and  about  the  drums  in
particular.  Further, Shariq notes that, based on  past  experience,  it  is
his opinion that analysis of the samples will  most  likely  determine  that
the drum contents would be classified as hazardous waste.  Of  course,  both
he and Chuck know that if the material is  hazardous  waste,  certain  steps
will legally have to be taken to  transport  and  properly  dispose  of  the
drums, including notifying the proper federal and state authorities.
Chuck abruptly ends the call, excitedly claiming to have hooked the  biggest
largemouth bass he has ever seen.  “Yeah, right – I think  you  mean  “long-
neck bass,” Shariq smiles to himself.
A short while later, Chuck calls Shariq and explains that (a) it was a  huge
bass, and (b) it got away.  Thanking Shariq for his expeditious work,  Chuck
briefly mentions that he  apprised  Sam  (the  client)  of  Shariq’s  verbal
report, and it turns out that the client doesn’t want to do  anything  about
the site – including the drums – at this time.  Also, and Shariq found  this
rather odd, Chuck asked Shariq to remind him  of  the  name  of  his  former
employer – the remediation contractor.
Before Chuck could get off the phone, Shariq had the  presence  of  mind  to
ask what to do with the samples – and now Shariq could clearly make out  the
sounds of laughter and a pool game  under  way  in  the  background.   Chuck
tells Shariq only to document the existence of the samples.  Further,  Chuck
informs Shariq that he will tell the client where  the  drums  are  located,
and that Shariq need do nothing else other than, of  course,  “Have  a  nice
weekend.”
Wednesday morning of the  following  week,  Shariq  happens  to  be  in  the
vicinity of that client’s property, and he is somewhat surprised  to  see  a
truck and crew from his former  employer  (the  remediation  contractor)  on
site.  Compelled by curiosity, Shariq stops to have  a  friendly  chat  with
his former co-workers, and  notices  that  the  two  drums  he  sampled  the
previous week are now loaded in the truck,  apparently  for  disposal.   Not
saying anything about his sampling, Shariq casually asks what  the  crew  is
up to, and one of them replies, “Nothing much.   We  got  a  call  yesterday
that these two drums had been tested and were shown to be  clean,  so  we’re
hauling them to a “fill dirt” site in a residential area south of town.
Shariq doesn’t say anything  to  his  friends  –  he  knows  they  are  only
responding to a dispatch from the boss –  but  as  he  drives  back  to  the
office, he  mulls  over  the  series  of  events.   Clearly  there  was  not
sufficient time for another environmental firm to collect  samples  and  get
results back this quickly – the claim that tests show the drums  contain  no
hazardous material is bogus.  In fact, the drums have  not  been  tested  at
all, and the only samples that exist are the  ones  in  Shariq’s  ice  chest
back at the lab.
What should Shariq do?

Alternate Approaches and Survey Results
Note:  This case is adapted, with  permission,  from  the  Opinions  of  the
National Society of Professional Engineers (NSPE) Board  of  Ethical  Review
(BER), Case 92-6, “Public Welfare  –  Hazardous  Waste.”   We  modified  the
facts and discussion for purposes of clarity and pedagogical  effectiveness,
and all person, place and business names herein are  purely  fictional.   To
view the original case and the actual  findings  of  the  NSPE  BER,  please
access this case on-line at  the  website  of  the  National  Institute  for
Engineering Ethics:  http://www.niee.org/cases/index.htm

Alternate Approaches
   1. Don’t worry, be happy.  Two drums of something aren’t likely to  cause
      harm to anyone, especially if mixed with  lots  of  other  fill  dirt.
      After all, isn’t “dilution the solution to pollution?”  Shariq  should
      ignore the matter and get on with his next project.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 1%
   2. Don’t worry.  Shariq has  done  his  job  and  reported  his  findings
      accurately and promptly.  Chuck is the person with the issue since  he
      is bound by a professional engineer’s code of  ethics  and  Shariq  is
      not.  Shariq can sleep at night. Maybe Chuck won’t.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 0%
   3. Worry.  Obviously the client is in violation of several laws and Chuck
      is abetting this.  Shariq can take some comfort in the  fact  that  he
      has notified the right people and they aren’t inclined to take action.
      But it would probably cost Shariq his job if he  were  to  make  waves
      about it.  Fortunately for Shariq, he is not a PE  and  has  no  legal
      obligation to do anything more. So the best thing for Shariq to do  is
      to say nothing and hope there are no problems.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 0%
   4. Notify the remediation  contractor,  quietly.   Shariq  is  not  in  a
      position to directly address the issue – he has been assigned to other
      projects.  But he can warn a friend  to  be  careful.   Shariq  should
      inform his previous employer, the remediation  contractor,  about  the
      possible liability they are assuming by disposing of these drums.   By
      giving them this notice,  the  remediation  contractor  is  now  in  a
      position to challenge the situation if they think  there  is  a  valid
      concern.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 7%
   5. Get the facts, quickly.  One test is worth a thousand expert opinions.
       Shariq should quietly notify his previous employer,  the  remediation
      contractor, of the situation and request that they delay in  disposing
      of the drums.  At the same time,  Shariq  should  submit  one  of  his
      samples from the drums to an analytical testing laboratory, requesting
      expedited RUSH results.  If the test results come back negative, there
      is no  problem.   But  if  the  results  show  that  the  material  is
      hazardous, Shariq should confront Chuck.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 34%
   6. Talk with Chuck, nicely.  Shariq  should  return  to  the  office  and
      mention to Chuck what he has observed.  While the drum disposal  might
      not be correct according to the regulations, Shariq has no  definitive
      proof otherwise.  He only has his “gut feel.”  The situation  will  go
      better if Shariq gives Chuck the benefit of the doubt.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 20%
   7. Talk with Chuck, pointedly.  Shariq should return to  the  office  and
      closely question Chuck about the matter.  Their firm has an obligation
      to ensure the drum contents  are  properly  disposed  of,  and  Shariq
      should communicate his expectation that Chuck to do the right thing.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 17%
   8. Challenge Chuck, directly.  Shariq must confront  Chuck  and  let  him
      know that unethical behavior – ignoring harm to the environment  –  is
      intolerable.  It is one  thing  for  Chuck  to  choose  to  place  his
      livelihood and professional credentials  on  the  line,  but  bringing
      Shariq unwillingly into the mess is not fair.   Shariq  should  insist
      that Chuck correct the situation or Shariq will resign.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 4%
   9. Report Chuck, anonymously.  Since Chuck is unwilling to intervene with
      respect to the disposal – which might actually not be  illegal  –  the
      best way to handle the situation is to anonymously inform the State PE
      Board and have them investigate.  The truth will come out and if Chuck
      and Sam are innocent … no harm done.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 7%
  10. Blow the whistle, loudly.  Shariq  has  reason  to  suspect  that  the
      contaminated dirt will be going to a residential area. A  child  could
      eat a chunk of hazardous waste and become seriously ill or die! Shariq
      must take action if Chuck won’t. The State has a  hot-line  number  to
      call and report illegal dumping, and now is the time to use it!
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 10%
Forum Comments from Respondents
   1.  The  fact  that  Shariq  is  a  technician  rather  that  a  licensed
      professional engineer might have some significance in legal  contexts,
      but ethically he cannot ignore this problem.  Communication is the key
      to addressing this issue, and  the  place  to  start  is  with  Chuck.
      Giving Chuck the benefit of the doubt, or at least not  accusing  him,
      is the correct demeanor.  If lines of communication with Chuck can  be
      established, Chuck and Shariq can jointly explore next steps  such  as
      contacting the client, doing some testing, etc.

   2. Shariq has lots of suspicions but no data to  back  them  up.   It  is
      possible that both Chuck  and  the  client  are  on  the  up  and  up.
      Therefore, Shariq should inform Chuck  professionally  about  what  he
      witnessed.  If a satisfactory explanation is not  forthcoming,  Shariq
      should inform a principal of his firm about what he witnessed and turn
      over the samples as well.  Once they are informed of the situation, it
      is the firm's obligation to  see  that  the  client,  the  remediation
      contractor, and the  authorities  are  informed  about  a  potentially
      hazardous situation.  "Blowing the whistle" or reporting Chuck or  his
      firm anonymously should be Shariq's last resort – unless it  is  clear
      that all three are in cahoots.  If Shariq's firm, the contractor,  and
      the client are clearly in cahoots on this one, poor Shariq is  between
      a rock and a hard place.  He should resign and consider  retaining  an
      attorney to protect himself from  potential  loss  of  reputation  and
      employment.  As his attorney and as an officer of the court,  Shariq's
      attorney has the obligation to protect his client’s interests  and  to
      inform the proper authorities that a law may have been broken.

Comments from Board of Review Members
   1. I’ve got several technical problems with the  scenario  in  the  first
      place.  Shariq goes on site to collect samples  (possibly),  the  last
      day before a holiday weekend…bad practice.  Many types of samples have
      a very short holding time and cannot simply be “stored on ice” for  an
      indefinite period. Most firms would wait until the day after a holiday
      rather than sample the day  before  one.  Secondly,  it  is  both  bad
      practice and unsafe practice for  one  person  to  sample  drums  with
      unknown contents. Thirdly, the remediation  contractor  suggests  that
      the materials in the drums are solid; viz., he is going to put them in
      site as clean fill dirt. It  is  very  difficult  for  one  person  by
      himself to sample soil  from  drums  properly.  Lastly,  there  is  no
      “motive” for Shariq to say from past experience that contaminated soil
      would be  hazardous  “waste”  —  a  very  important  distinction  from
      “hazardous materials” as a term that is used later. These are not  the
      same!   While  both  terms  have  specific  meanings  and   regulatory
      requirements, the requirements for each are very  different  depending
      upon which you have! It is pretty much impossible to look at a drum of
      soil and know “from past experience” the material would  be  hazardous
      waste.  While this may be the way the situation described in the story
      really happened, if so, it amounts to bad sampling practice.

      Those technical issues aside, what should Shariq do?  He knows he  did
      not test the soil and he knows his firm did not,  and  he  also  knows
      nobody else could have over the weekend. However,  he  does  not  know
      that nobody else EVER tested the soil. Legally,  the  owner  can  also
      certify based on knowledge of the origin of the soil that  it  is  not
      hazardous waste. So, the proper thing for Shariq  to  do  is  to  call
      Chuck immediately – while the remediation contractor is still there  –
      and ask if he knows what is going on.  Chuck can say “don’t worry”  or
      can provide a reasonable explanation – e.g.,  the  soils  were  tested
      months ago when they were put in the drums and  are  clean.  If  Chuck
      appears to be hiding the truth and the soils  have  not  been  tested,
      then Shariq should go to Chuck’s boss and have  a  discussion.  Shariq
      can also ask the contractor’s  foreman  if  they  have  been  provided
      copies of the test results (they should have been); and he can ask  to
      review them. If the contractor knows Shariq’s company was not involved
      in the testing they may be a little  more  concerned  themselves.   Of
      course, if Shariq keeps getting stonewalled, he  faces  a  dilemma  of
      what to do next.

   2. Shariq should prepare a compressive, written report detailing all  his
      observations,  including  observing   the   remediation   contractor’s
      involvement.   The  report  should  also  include  summaries  of   all
      applicable laws, rules and regulations that he is aware  of  that  are
      relative to the matter.  The report should be submitted to Chuck  with
      a letter of transmittal  recommending  what  Shariq  believes  is  the
      appropriate action Chuck should take.  When this is done,  Shariq  has
      discharged his ethical responsibilities.

