
                  Expert Impartiality: A Thing of the Past?
                                 (Case 1004)

The mission of the National Institute for Engineering Ethics  (NIEE)  is  to
promote ethics in engineering practice  and  education.   One  component  of
NIEE  is  the  Applied  Ethics  in  Professional  Practice  (AEPP)  program,
providing free engineering  ethics  cases  for  educational  purposes.   The
following case may be reprinted if it is provided  free  of  charge  to  the
engineer or  student.   Written  permission  is  required  if  the  case  is
reprinted for resale.  For more cases and other NIEE  Products  &  Services,
contact  the  National  Institute  for  Engineering   Ethics,   Texas   Tech
University, www.niee.org..  (All reprints must contain these statements)

The Case:
You have been retained as an engineering  consultant  by  Adams,  Baker  and
Charles, legal counsel for the insurance company  which  insures  Wastewater
Treatment Systems, Inc., the defendant  in  a  law  suit  filed  by  Kinkora
Developments.  Your responsibility is to analyze  the  claims  made  by  the
plaintiff, Kinkora Developments,  concerning  the  alleged  failure  of  the
sludge treatment facility at a sewage treatment plant which was designed  12
years ago by Wastewater Treatment  Systems  for  a  very  large  residential
community planned and constructed by Kinkora.   It  is  understood  that  in
addition to providing technical consultation regarding the sludge  treatment
system and possible reasons  for  the  alleged  failure,  you  may  also  be
requested to appear  in  court  as  an  expert  witness  on  behalf  of  the
defendant.

You indicate to Fulton Adams (of Adams, Baker  and  Charles),  the  attorney
assigned to the case by Wastewater Treatment’s insurance company,  that  you
will review all of the available information, make a site visit  and  advise
him as to whether you believe the plaintiff has a reasonable  complaint,  or
whether there is other  evidence  to  explain  the  failure  of  the  sludge
treatment process.  With his approval, and  the  concurrence  of  Wastewater
Treatment, you spend a considerable amount  of  time  reviewing  the  design
parameters  and  construction  of  the  facility,  including  two  days   of
observations at the plant while you have a severe cold.

You subsequently advise Adams that you believe  there  is  reasonable  doubt
that the system failure is due to the design, but  rather  it  appears  that
Kinkora Developments had never had experience operating a  sewage  treatment
plant previously, and had hired a number of  inexperienced  treatment  plant
operators  who  systematically  neglected  to  maintain  the  equipment   in
accordance with the recommendations made  in  the  O  &  M  (Operations  and
Maintenance) Manual prepared for the plant by Wastewater Treatment Systems.

Despite  the  presentation  of  this  evidence  in  depositions  during  the
discovery process, the plaintiff, represented by Amanda Cuthbert of  Xernon,
Young and Zimmer, is considering taking the claim to court.   You  are  soon
informed that Clyde Cleghorn, an engineer with one of your competitors,  has
been retained by Kinkora Developments as their  engineering  consultant  and
expert witness.  You have run into Cleghorn from time  to  time  at  various
engineering society meetings, and understand that his  experience  has  been
primarily dealing with small, on-site sewage  disposal  systems  for  single
family lots.  Other than that, you have little first-hand knowledge  of  his
capabilities.

During his deposition (to which you  are  invited  by  Fulton  Adams  as  an
observer), Cleghorn makes a variety of statements which reveal that  he  has
little understanding of  sludge  treatment  systems  design  or  operations.
During the occasional breaks in the  deposition  proceedings,  you  casually
notice that Cleghorn tends to be quite solicitous of Amanda  Cuthbert,  more
so than you would expect in a client/consultant relationship.

Reviewing the statements and analyses made by  Cleghorn,  you  are  all  the
more convinced that he has  missed  the  mark  completely  and  that  shoddy
maintenance was the cause of the failure.  You inform Fulton Adams  of  your
reinforced opinion, and he in turn indicates that the insurance company  for
Kinkora has refused to provide any  further  financial  support  for  Amanda
Cuthbert.  Nonetheless, the president of Kinkora  insists  on  pursuing  the
matter in court, and there is conjecture that Amanda has agreed to  continue
with the case on a contingency  basis  (that  is,  she  and  her  firm  will
receive  approximately  40%  or  more  of  the  award  if  the  court  finds
Wastewater Treatment Systems at fault).

Dates for the trial are arranged by the  court,  starting  in  approximately
six weeks.  In the interim, you attend an engineering society conference  at
a resort some 400 miles  from  your  city.   Looking  through  the  list  of
attendees, you note that most of the engineers  have  brought  their  wives,
and the attendance roster lists them as in the following example:
            Robert and Mary Jones
            Delbert and Cynthia Ryley

Further down the roster you see the following entry:

            Clyde Cleghorn and Amanda Cuthbert

Checking with the front desk, you find that they are sharing a room  at  the
conference.  Once you return to your city, you make some discreet  inquiries
only to find out that Clyde has been separated from  his  wife  for  several
months, and that Amanda Cuthbert has been  divorced  for  three  years.   In
addition, one of the engineers in his office verifies that  Clyde  moved  in
with Amanda about the time the Kinkora  case  started  and  they  have  been
living together since then.

What, if anything, do you do?

Alternate Approaches and Survey Results for “Expert  Impartiality,  a  Thing
of the Past?” (Case 1004)
1.    This type of thing probably goes on all the time,  to  one  extent  or
    another.  Better to leave things alone, since you will  still  have  to
    live in the same engineering community as Cleghorn after  the  case  is
    decided.  So what if they are working together to make as much money as
    possible from the contingency arrangement that they have made with  the
    plaintiff after the plaintiff’s insurance company  pulled  out  of  the
    case?  More power to them for being so clever!
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 2%
2.    Say nothing.  Stick to doing your best job on engineering matters  and
    don’t involve yourself in politics or other matters.  Give your  expert
    opinion on the technical matters at hand only.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 12%

3.    Say nothing.  You probably violated some right of personal privacy  by
    inquiring at the front desk  to  ascertain  that  Cleghorn  and  Amanda
    Cuthbert  were  registered  in  the  same  room  at   the   engineering
    convention.  Also, how do  you  know  what  one  of  the  engineers  in
    Cleghorn’s office told you is true?   In  this  day  and  age,  such  a
    relationship is not unusual and who are you to  be  so  self-righteous?
    Despite their personal relationship, Cleghorn could still  be  behaving
    as an unbiased professional with regard to the law suit.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 6%

4.    Say nothing.  The recent emphasis in government and the press on  “the
    appearance of fairness” and  presumed  lack  of  integrity,  especially
    regarding professional engineers, is demeaning and denigrating  to  the
    profession.  People, especially engineers,  are  inherently  good,  and
    left  alone,  they  will  make  moral,  ethical  decisions  and  behave
    accordingly.  By saying anything, you are implying that Cleghorn is not
    acting in an ethical manner.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 1%

5.    Although the behavior of Cleghorn and Cuthbert  may  be  against  your
    religious and moral principles, do not try to use  it  against  him  in
    this situation.  Their  behavior  is  not  at  issue  and  society,  in
    general, has accepted this type of behavior to some  degree.   Instead,
    the strategy would be to delve into Cleghorn’s technical background  to
    find weaknesses that can be exploited during trial and try to discredit
    him as an “expert witness”.  Put aside the moral issues  for  the  time
    being.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 14%

6.    Call Cuthbert and Cleghorn on the telephone at home  and  inform  them
    of your suspicions and evidence, mentioning both the situation  at  the
    convention as well  as  “confidential  information”  given  to  you  by
    unnamed, but otherwise  reliable,  sources  in  the  local  engineering
    community.  Suggest the  prudent  thing  is  for  Cleghorn  to  find  a
    plausible excuse for excusing himself as an expert witness in the  case
    before it gets to court.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 4%

7.    Inform the defendant’s attorney, Fulton Adams (your  client)  of  what
    you have discovered, and the sources of the information.  Suggest  that
    this may well be a conflict of interest and a  violation  of  the  NSPE
    Code  of  Ethics  for  Engineers  under  the  Rules  of  Practice   and
    Professional Obligations.  If so, then  Cleghorn’s  credibility  as  an
    unbiased engineering expert is seriously in question.  In similar cases
    in the past, the  testimony  of  the  “expert”  has  not  been  allowed
    (admissible) in court.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 46%

8.    Inform the defendant’s attorney, Fulton Adams (your  client)  of  what
    you have discovered,  and  the  source  of  the  information.   Suggest
    strongly that Cleghorn’s emotional desires have caused him to  overstep
    the  bounds  of  ethical  professionalism,  and  this  is  a  wonderful
    opportunity to get rid of him as a witness for the plaintiff,  Kinkora,
    thereby providing excellent  leverage  for  the  defendant,  Wastewater
    Treatment Systems to win the  case.   (You  never  did  like  Cleghorn,
    anyway).
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 6%

9.    Compile  the  information  you  have  and  file  a  complaint  against
    Cleghorn with  the  state’s  Board  of  Registration  for  Professional
    Engineers.   This  type  of  thing  is  demeaning  to  the  engineering
    profession and should be stopped.  Getting Cleghorn’s license suspended
    or revoked is the best way to do it.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 9%


Forum Comments from Respondents

1.    The first thing to be done is to contact Cleghorn directly to  see  if
    he feels the same way you do.  If that doesn’t work, bring it  up  with
    the defendant’s lawyer, Fulton Adams.

2.    If Cleghorn is really as inexperienced as you believe him to  be,  his
    expert testimony will have some discrepancies.  Also, he will  have  to
    state his credentials and experience at some point, which  will  surely
    throw some doubt on the value of his testimony.   Personally,  I  don’t
    care who he’s sleeping with as long as it’s not the judge.

3.    My first reaction in a case like this is to speak with  the  offending
    party directly about my concerns, especially if I knew him  personally.
    I would convey a belief in my  ethical  responsibility  to  report  the
    situation if  he  didn’t  take  action  to  correct  this  conflict  of
    interest.  However, due to the impending court  appearance,  a  private
    conversation that is not part of the public record may be illegal.

4.     Getting  personally  involved  in   the   situation   is   completely
    unnecessary.  Not only does it waste your time, it would undermine your
    position as an expert witness in the case.  Let lawyers stick to  legal
    stuff.

5.    The information about  Cleghorn’s  relationship  with  Amada  Cuthbert
    suggest that he was selected  to  represent  Kinkora  because  of  this
    relationship rather  than  his  professional  expertise.   However,  if
    Cleghorn is not qualified, he should not be allowed to  testify  as  an
    expert.  The best person to handle this legal matter is  Fulton  Adams,
    the defendant’s attorney.

6.    An expert witness is not an attorney.  If Cleghorn’s  behavior  raises
    a conflict of interest concern, it is the  defense  attorney’s  job  to
    deal with it.  After informing the defense attorney, Adams, you  should
    drop the issue and stick with the technical stuff.

7.     You  should  let  the  defendant’s  attorney  handle  the  situation.
    Attorneys are not hampered by mundane details like ethics.

8.    Keep the  information  you  have  discovered  about  the  relationship
    between Cleghorn and Amanda Cuthbert as an “ace in  the  hole”  as  you
    approach the trial date.  Discreetly let  Cuthbert  and  Cleghorn  know
    that you are aware of their relationship (they are obviously not trying
    to hide it) and the potential conflict it represents.  Advise them that
    this will be fair game in court (judge permitting).   Then  it’s  their
    move…

9.    It is the defense attorney’s job  to  investigate  and  determine  the
    legalities of such items  as  the  relationship  between  Cleghorn  and
    Cuthbert, the bearing it has on the case and any course  of  action  to
    take.  If after all the matters of the case are settled and  you  still
    feel that Cleghorn violated  his  professional  code  of  conduct,  you
    should recommend to your client that a  complaint  be  filed  with  the
    State Board of Registration.   If  the  case  is  litigated  Cleghorn’s
    credibility would likely receive quite a bit of scrutiny.

10.   My view is that there will always be professionals on the project  end
    of things who will  under-bid,  under-investigate  and  under-build  in
    order to get and  keep  as  much  work  as  possible  in-house.   These
    professionals contribute to  the  proliferation  of  “hired  guns”  who
    commonly are highly talented, but highly jaded professionals forced out
    of their practices because they found they could not compete with those
    willing to offer a lower level of service.  While  I  have  no  problem
    with  these  hired  guns,  advocates,  on  the  other  hand,   are   as
    reprehensible.   That  is  why  it  is  so  important  for  the  honest
    professional expert to do  his  work  well  so  that  the  advocate  is
    discredited on the basis of lack of technical merit.  The  job  of  the
    professional expert is to weave a  defensible,  internally  consistent,
    technical study and present it in a clear, understandable manner.  This
    is the ethical approach to the destruction of the advocate,  regardless
    of the advocate’s motive.

11.   The facts suggest that Clyde Cleghorn has  several  potential  ethical
    problems with his client, Amanda Cuthbert.  First, it does  not  appear
    that Cleghorn is being trustworthy in his deeds and is not  acting  for
    his client diligently,  faithfully,  and  with  principles.   Secondly,
    Cleghorn does not appear to be  providing  complete,  clear,  accurate,
    objective,  and  truthful  opinions  between  himself  and  his  client
    regarding the services sought and rendered.  There is further confusion
    because it appears that Amanda is not necessarily  seeking  the  truth,
    rather she would like a “hired  gun”  for  an  expert  witness.   As  a
    result, Amanda’s client (Kinkora)  may  not  be  getting  an  objective
    analysis of the case.  Because of my  involvement  in  the  case  as  a
    technical expert, I would ask another reputable engineer that I respect
    and trust to examine the facts  and  provide  an  unbiased  opinion  on
    Cleghorn’s conduct.  Based on that  opinion,  I  would  pursue  further
    action on what was defined as ethical violations.


Epilogue

Fulton Adams was informed of what had been learned and the  sources  of  the
information.  When the case came to court, Adams  petitioned  the  presiding
judge to  disallow  testimony  from  Clyde  Cleghorn  due  to  his  lack  of
impartiality and  obvious  conflict  of  interest.   The  judge  refused  to
disqualify Cleghorn, and instructed the parties to proceed  with  litigating
the case.  There was some conjecture by the defendant’s attorneys  that  the
judge’s liberal empathy for Amanda Cuthbert influenced  his  decision,  even
in face of the evidence.

