
                       It's Just the Nearness of Who?
                                 (Case 1019)

The mission of the National Institute for Engineering Ethics  (NIEE)  is  to
promote ethics in engineering practice  and  education.   One  component  of
NIEE  is  the  Applied  Ethics  in  Professional  Practice  (AEPP)  program,
providing free engineering  ethics  cases  for  educational  purposes.   The
following case may be reprinted if it is provided  free  of  charge  to  the
engineer or  student.   Written  permission  is  required  if  the  case  is
reprinted for resale.  For more cases and other NIEE  Products  &  Services,
contact  the  National  Institute  for  Engineering   Ethics,   Texas   Tech
University, www.niee.org..  (All reprints must contain these statements)

The Case:
Tim Mover, a young professional engineer with about 10 years of  experience,
is  employed  by  Global  Engineering  and  Construction,  Inc.,  a   large,
international design and construction firm.  He  is  proceeding  quickly  up
the corporate ladder and was recently assigned  as  regional  manager  in  a
branch  office  several  hours  by  airplane  away  from  the  main  office.
Although the office is small, he has a  staff  consisting  of  an  assistant
manager and a secretary.  Tim is aware that the firm is negotiating a multi-
million dollar contract that will require someone with a background such  as
his to be the overall project manager.  Although  Tim  is  relatively  young
for such a position, he suspects that his current job as branch manager  was
arranged in order to evaluate his potential and ability to handle the multi-
million dollar project.  If he gets the new assignment, he will move to  the
project site several states away within the next two years.

As for Tim's current assignment,  his  office  is  responsible  for  project
development and preliminary designs, as  well  as  supervision  of  on-going
contracts.  Tim's assistant, Roy Stalward,  is  a  seasoned,  field-oriented
engineer who is 15 years older than Tim.  Roy is  highly  respected  in  the
home office and his opinion in construction matters  is  rarely  questioned.
Roy has had 10 years of experience in this same branch office.  His area  of
responsibility is managing the on-going projects, thereby relieving  Tim  to
concentrate  on  developing  new  projects,  project  planning  and   client
relations in the area.

Tim's initial impression of Roy confirms Roy's reputation.  However,  within
a month of Tim starting work in the branch office, he observed  Roy  in  the
company of a particularly attractive younger woman.  As Roy is not  married,
Tim thought nothing unusual about the occurrence.  The next  week,  however,
Tim attended  a  meeting  with  one  of  the  firm's  major  subcontractors,
Hotspark Electrical Co., and the same young lady  was  present.   It  turned
out that she is the daughter of Hotspark's owner, as  well  as  the  general
manager of the electrical subcontracting company.  Over the next six  months
Tim twice observed  Roy  and  the  young  woman  at  unusual  times  and  in
locations which suggested something other than a strictly business  relation
between them.  Finally Tim confronted Roy directly and asked  if  he  had  a
personal relationship with the young lady.  Roy said that he did not.

Tim now faces a dilemma.  Tim is Roy's  supervisor,  but  because  of  Roy's
seniority, Tim is not in a position to reassign or fire him.   Tim  suspects
that Hotspark Electrical is receiving preferential treatment at the  expense
of his firm, Global Engineering and Construction, but he has been unable  to
document anything specific.  Regardless of documentation, Tim  is  concerned
that compromises in the quality of  the  work  performed  by  Hotspark  will
inevitably occur in the future on some on-going projects.  Global  does  not
have an explicit policy  preventing  personal  employee  relationships  with
subcontractors.  Nonetheless, Tim  was  once  told  that  the  president  of
Global takes a personal  interest  in  "conflict  of  interest"  situations,
particularly if they cost the firm money.

Should Tim do something, and if so what?  (Roy is   still  held  in  highest
regard by everyone else in the firm, and Tim probably only has a year or  so
left in this branch office before  going  on  to  manage  the  multi-million
dollar project.)

Alternate Approaches and Survey Results  for  “It’s  Just  the  Nearness  of
Who?” (Case 1019)
1.    Tim should do nothing, since it would be a case of Tim’s word  against
    Roy’s, and Tim has no documented  evidence  of  any  specific  “favors”
    having been given to Hotspark.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  5%

2.    Tim should go to  Global’s  main  office,  have  a  meeting  with  the
    company  president  and  apprise  him/her  fully  of   the   situation,
    emphasizing Roy’s value to the firm.  He should then ask for advice  on
    how to handle the situation from that  point  on,  in  the  absence  of
    specific written company policy.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  6%

3.    Despite the fact that Tim is being groomed  for  increased  managerial
    responsibilities  in  a  different  location,  he  should  discuss  the
    situation with his immediate supervisor on a  confidential  basis.   He
    needs to explain that he has  found  nothing  that  indicates  improper
    activities are taking place, but there is a perception.  He should seek
    advice and direction from this immediate supervisor.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  19%

4.    Tim should ask the president’s office for a  specific  written  policy
    covering situations such as this as an  addition  to  Global’s  company
    employee policy manual, without indicating that there is  an  immediate
    problem, or who might be involved.  Then he should use the new  written
    policy to take appropriate action with Roy.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  10%

5.    Tim should check the bidding  procedures  and  history  of  Hotspark’s
    involvement with Global, including an informal audit of the quality  of
    Hotspark’s work.  If there  are  irregularities  in  that  regard,  Tim
    should confront Roy for an explanation.  If  he  is  not  satisfied  by
    Roy’s response, Tim should then speak with  the  president  of  Global.
    However, if there are  no  irregularities  with  Hotspark’s  work,  Tim
    should do nothing more than caution  Roy  on  “potential  conflicts  of
    interest”.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  18%

6.    Tim should do nothing at the present time, but should keep  a  log  of
    any future observed  “meetings” between  Roy  and  the  subcontractor’s
    representative, as well as keep  close  documentation  of  any  unusual
    costs for any projects where Hotspark is used as a subcontractor.   Tim
    can then confront Roy  with  this  evidence  before  either  firing  or
    transferring him to another location.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  4%

7.    Tim should call Roy into his office and tell him that  the  perception
    is  that  Roy  has  a  “special”   relationship   with   one   of   the
    subcontractors, which,  while  not  against  explicit  company  policy,
    nonetheless could attract the attention of  the  president  of  Global.
    Tim should also mention that the president takes a personal interest in
    conflict  of  interest  situations,   especially   where   preferential
    treatment of a subcontractor may result in loss of  profit  to  Global.
    Tim should also tell Roy that he is a valued employee of Global  and  a
    situation like this, if not handled properly, could impact  his  future
    with Global if it became public knowledge.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  18%

8.    Tim should talk with  Roy  and  explain  that  while  perhaps  nothing
    unusual is taking place, there is a perception  of  impropriety.   This
    perception will have a damaging effect  on  Global’s  reputation  as  a
    general contractor.  He should also suggest that  Roy  spend  an  equal
    amount of time with representatives of other electrical  subcontractors
    who work with Global.  Hopefully Roy will appreciate  the  concern  and
    take appropriate action.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  12%

9.    Tim should get to know the young woman’s personality and character  by
    taking her out to lunch.  In this way, he can  more  accurately  assess
    her motives and capabilities in her interactions with Roy.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  0%

10.   Tim should seek out his  own  personal  relationship  with  the  young
    woman from Hotspark.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  8%


Forum Comments from Respondents

1.    Additional possibilities for Tim to consider:
    What has been the degree of ethical conduct by Roy in the past?   Would
    his ethical principles override lust?
    The relationship could be harmless despite appearances..but considering
    human nature it could be real.
    Can Tim act on suspicions alone?  There is a risk that his hunch may be
    wrong.
    If Tim reassigns Roy or fires him, what would be  the  consequences  to
    Tim’s career?  What would be the consequences to the company?
    What are the motives of the young woman?

 2. I once had a somewhat similar case in my office and it was nearly a no-
    win situation.  Denial is always the first thing you  hear.   Next  the
    defenders go on the offense and try to  attack  your  own  credibility.
    It’s best to proceed  very  cautiously  and  try  to  maintain  a  good
    relationship with both parties, yet be firm in your position that  this
    sort of behavior just can’t continue.

 3. Tim should find an explicit company policy on the issue.  If  there  is
    none, then Tim  should  caution  Roy  about  a  perceived  preferential
    treatment relationship.   Because  Tim  is  seeking  higher  managerial
    positions, he should handle the issue himself to prove  his  managerial
    capabilities.  He should then consult his supervisor to be sure he  has
    acted appropriately.

4.    Tim needs to sit down with Roy.  He must keep  in  mind  that  Roy  is
    probably aware of his ethical responsibilities  to  the  company.   Tim
    must explain that he is knowledgeable about Roy’s  abilities  and  they
    are well earned.  But no one is without fault.  He  should  explain  to
    Roy that his personal life is just that – his personal life – until  it
    becomes unethical.   He  should  also  let  Roy  know  that  additional
    attention will be about the activities of the company the  young  woman
    works for to insure that no irregularities are occurring.

5.    Tim should follow Roy and the young  woman,  take  pictures  of  their
    encounters, and then suggest that Roy end the relationship,  or  things
    could get ugly.  Tim should let Roy view the pictures so he knows  that
    Tim means business. [editor’s comment: hmmmmmm?!]

6.    A point to consider: In the corporate world,  especially  when  viewed
    through the public eye,  the  appearance  of  impropriety  is  just  as
    damaging to the reputation of that  company  or  employee  as  the  act
    itself.  So even if no preferential treatment is occurring as a  result
    of the relationship, it is nonetheless damaging to the company and  its
    reputation with other subcontractors and the public.   Based  on  that,
    the managerial staff and president have a right to be informed  of  the
    situation.

