

                          An Offer You Can't Refuse

                                 (Case 1020)

The mission of the National Institute for Engineering Ethics  (NIEE)  is  to
promote ethics in engineering practice  and  education.   One  component  of
NIEE  is  the  Applied  Ethics  in  Professional  Practice  (AEPP)  program,
providing free engineering  ethics  cases  for  educational  purposes.   The
following case may be reprinted if it is provided  free  of  charge  to  the
engineer or  student.   Written  permission  is  required  if  the  case  is
reprinted for resale.  For more cases and other NIEE  Products  &  Services,
contact  the  National  Institute  for  Engineering   Ethics,   Texas   Tech
University, www.niee.org..  (All reprints must contain these statements)

The Case:
Your firm has been  retained  by  NW  Developers,  Ltd.  (a  large  regional
shopping center developer) to do field explorations and laboratory  testing,
and make geotechnical  design  recommendations  for  an  extensive  shopping
center mall adjacent to a busy interstate freeway in the Pacific  Northwest.
   More   specifically,   you   are   responsible   for   site   development
recommendations (including extensive cuts, fill  placement  and  compaction)
and recommendations for foundation support for the proposed mall  buildings.
 The developer has entered into a separate contract with Noall  Engineering,
a civil engineering firm  with  whom  you  have  done  business  previously.
Noall's responsibility is to design the  proposed  parking  lots,  roadways,
and  surface  water  drainage  system.   While  you  interact  with  Noall's
engineers to some extent during your  work,  there  is  no  direct  contract
between the two firms.  Rather, both firms are under  contract  directly  to
the developer.  In this way, the  developer  exerts  greater  financial  and
cost control over the project.

Your analyses indicate  that  the  buildings  may  be  supported  on  spread
footing foundations with ground-floor slabs supported on grade, as  long  as
the on-site material is placed and compacted properly.

While you are completing this work, it becomes obvious that  the  city  will
not allow the traffic volume the  new  mall  will  generate  to  be  carried
entirely on the existing adjacent streets.  As a result, due  to  the  close
proximity of the interstate freeway, the developer asks your firm  to  do  a
geotechnical study and make recommendations for support of a  proposed  off-
ramp from the interstate freeway directly onto the shopping mall property  -
a plan which has been approved by the state  Department  of  Transportation.
It is called a "fly-over ramp" since  it  consists  of  a  bridge  structure
which will cross over a busy  thoroughfare  in  order  to  access  the  mall
property from the freeway.

Your firm completes the field work and  analyses  for  the  fly-over  bridge
structure and recommends that concrete-filled steel pipe piles be  installed
for  the  heavy  bridge  column  loads.   You  provide  the  developer  with
specifications for the materials and installation of these  pipe  piles  for
inclusion in the construction contract documents.

The project is bid in two pieces and awarded to  two  separate  contractors.
One is responsible for doing the earthwork and compaction  for  the  general
site grading.  The other, Hirise  Construction,  is  a  bridge  construction
contractor for  the  fly-over  bridge  ramp.   Your  firm  is  hired  by  NW
Developers to  provide  field  observations  and  testing  during  the  site
grading phase of the project, even though Noall made a focused  effort  with
the developer to have their field construction technicians on the site  (the
construction period took several months and the  fee  for  the  construction
observation services was substantial).

While the site grading contract was underway, Hirise began construction  for
the  fly-over  bridge  foundation  using  Deepdown  Pile  Driving  as  their
subcontractor for the pile  installations.   Deepdown  purchased  the  steel
pipe for the  piles  through  a  Canadian  distributor,  who  supplied  pipe
fabricated in a far-eastern country.  Noall Engineers convinced  the  owner,
NW  Developers,  that  their  field  technicians  had  years  of  experience
observing and inspecting pile driving  operations,  and  as  a  result  were
hired by NW Developers to inspect the pile installations.

During the  initial  day  or  two  of  pile  driving,  Deepdown  experienced
problems in the field which appeared to  baffle  Noall's  field  technician.
Your field engineer observing the site grading work offered to provide  some
assistance to Noall's personnel.   NW Developers thanked you for the  offer,
but   stated   emphatically   that   the   pile   inspection   was   Noall's
responsibility, and  your  firm  was  not  to  interact  with  Noall  unless
specifically requested by NW Developers.   The  project  continued  and  you
were not requested to assist Noall's personnel.

After completion of the fly-over bridge,  Hirise  Construction  submitted  a
claim to NW Developers on behalf  of  their  subcontractor,  Deepdown  Pile,
saying that the pile design  recommendations  prepared  by  your  firm  were
faulty, and they experienced  numerous  difficulties  during  pile  driving,
including splits in the spiral pipe welding and buckled splices  where  pipe
sections were welded together in the field before  driving.   As  a  result,
they ran out of pipe and had to purchase more at a far  greater  unit  price
than
they had agreed in their contract with  Hirise.   Their  extra  compensation
claim was for $125,000 ($125k) and Hirise tacked on an additional  $15k  for
their costs in handling the claim with the developer, for a total  claim  of
$140k to the developer.

Even though your engineer was  not  allowed  to  observe  the  pile  driving
operations in the field, you were called in by the developer  and  Noall  to
review the situation.  You discover that 1) Deepdown Pile had  ordered  only
enough pipe to complete the job on the  assumption  that  no  additional  or
replacement pipe sections would be  required  during  construction;  2)  the
length of pipe ordered by Deepdown was based on the depth to the top of  the
underlying denser soil bearing layer, without allowance for  penetration  of
the piles into this layer to achieve the  necessary  resistance  to  support
the column loads; 3) the last several sets of piles driven were made  of  up
short sections welded together in the field, with as  many  as  seven  field
butt welds in a 65-foot pile length; 4) photographs of sections of the  pipe
used clearly showed that the spiral welding was faulty,  and  instead  of  a
full thickness of pipe wall across the  welds,  the  spiral  weld  was  just
barely holding adjacent sections of  the  pipe  wall  together  because  the
spiral was out of round; and 5) Noall's field inspector said nothing to  the
contractor about these problems during construction and did not  reject  any
of the pipe material.

The Developer states that they know nothing about this type  of  thing,  and
that it is something that needs to  be  handled  by  Noall  and  your  firm,
insinuating that the $140k claim (or whatever is agreed to) should  be  paid
by someone other than themselves.

Shortly thereafter, you are notified by Noall  that  the  developer  has  in
fact agreed to contribute $50k to settle the claim and Noall is  willing  to
contribute $35k to make the problem go away.  They are looking to your  firm
to come up with the remaining $55k to settle the claim.  You  indicate  that
the pile design recommendations were correct, your firm was not  allowed  to
be present during the pile driving to solve problems as they  arose  in  the
field, and that the evidence indicated that the pipe used in the  piles  was
inferior.   As  a  result,  your  firm  feels  no  financial  obligation  to
participate in the claim settlement.  You are willing, however,  to  act  in
behalf  of  the  developer  and  Noall  in  presenting  and  discussing  the
technical evidence uncovered.

A couple of weeks later you receive a telephone call from  Noall's  attorney
who tells you that a mediation hearing is scheduled  and  that  you  are  to
appear.  The objective of the mediation  is  to  settle  the  claim  without
going to court.  You have  been  in  a  mediation  hearing  previously,  and
observed that the facts and merits of the case were only incidental  to  the
effort by the mediator to have everyone contribute something financially  to
get the matter settled.  The bargaining was done by the mediator  with  each
of the parties involved in the claim  individually  in  separate  rooms,  so
that one party was not sure what the position of any other party  was.   You
had ended up contributing money to  the  settlement,  even  though  you  had
strong evidence that the problem was no fault of your firm.

After you tell Noall's attorney that you are happy to attend  the  mediation
to present technical facts, but  not  to  participate  as  a  party  to  the
settlement, John Dour, the president of Noall, calls you on  the  telephone.
During the conversation, he states emphatically that you must appear at  the
mediation proceedings and be a party  to  the  settlement  because  of  your
firm's involvement in the project.  He also states  in  no  uncertain  terms
(and rather loudly) that if you do not appear  at  the  mediation,  he  will
personally see to it that the State  Board  of  Registration  for  Engineers
revokes your Professional Engineer's  license.   Also  made  clear  is  that
Noall Engineers will never do business with your firm again.

After you put down the telephone and notice the smoke still  coming  out  of
the receiver, you face the question: what, if anything, do you do?

Alternate Approaches  and  Survey  Results  for  “An  Invitation  You  Can’t
Refuse” (Case 1020)
1.    Threaten legal  action  against  Noall,  and  possibly  Deepdown  Pile
    Driving.  Their shoddy work deserves punishment!
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  2%

2.    Losing your professional engineer’s license is a serious  matter!   Do
    as Noall’s president, Dour, wants you to do.  Go to the  mediation  and
    bring your firm’s checkbook.   Nothing  is  worth  not  being  able  to
    practice your profession!
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  1%

3.    Play ball.   Your  reputation  and  future  prospects  will  certainly
    absorb the money your firm will pay as a result of mediation.  Consider
    it a learning experience (“the cost of doing business”).
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  2%

4.    Agree to participate in the mediation, but then try  to  convince  all
    of the participants that you are not responsible  and  should  not  pay
    anything toward the settlement.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  4%

5.    Mediation is far less expensive than litigation (going to court),  and
    is not binding.  Therefore you should agree  to  mediation,  making  it
    clear that your firm enters the discussions with the strong  belief  of
    no responsibility.  Your firm can be a good listener and  at  the  end,
    not agree to participate  in  any  financial  settlement.   Of  course,
    pressure will be applied to you to have your  firm  contribute  to  the
    settlement, but you should not give in – assuming the  facts  developed
    through the mediation process do not  change  your  firm’s  opinion  of
    responsibilities.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  31%

6.    The Code of Ethics for Engineers published by the National Society  of
    Professional Engineers (NSPE) and the code published  by  the  American
    Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE), as well as the code produced by  the
    American Consulting Engineers Council (ACEC) all indicate that  ethical
    practice requires an engineer to act in professional matters  for  each
    employer or client as faithful agents or  trustees.   Therefore,  since
    Noall has been a client, do as they want, even though it will cost your
    firm on the order of $55k.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  0%

7.    The NSPE Code of  Ethics  (Section  III.1.a)  says,  “Engineers  shall
    admit and accept their own errors when proven wrong  and  refrain  from
    distorting or altering  the  facts  in  an  attempt  to  justify  their
    decisions.”  Since Noall’s personnel were wrong in  not  rejecting  the
    faulty pipe for the piles, and did not reject the piles  as  fabricated
    in the field prior to driving, it is they who are violating the Code of
    Ethics.  You should refuse to attend or participate financially in  the
    mediation.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  18%

8.    Tell Dour that for all the  reasons  you  discovered,  your  firm  has
    absolutely  no  responsibility  in  this  issue,  and  you   will   not
    participate  in  any  mediation  proceedings  in  which  there  is  any
    expectation of your firm contributing money to  the  settlement.   Also
    tell him that if he persists in threatening you with revocation of your
    professional license, you in turn will bring the entire  matter  up  to
    the State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers, and testify
    regarding his unprofessional extortion tactics.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  27%

9.    Welcome the opportunity to “never do business”  with  Noall  Engineers
    again.  They obviously do not respect the consultants they  deal  with.
    Also tell Dour that if he contacts the State Board of Registration  for
    Professional Engineers to have your license revoked, you  will  contact
    the Board and present the strong evidence showing  that  his  firm  was
    negligent in managing the job, and you will consider taking the case to
    court claiming professional harassment.  (Perhaps he can also see smoke
    coming from his telephone receiver!)
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  15%




Forum Comments from Respondents

1.    Accept the offer to participate  in  mediation  because  I  knew  that
    Noall was inexperienced in inspecting the job in the field and did  not
    bring specific errors of the inspection process to  NW  Developers.   I
    will gladly pay some of the  settlement;  however  the  amount  of  the
    payment should be less than Noall’s, due to the fact that it was  their
    negligence which allowed Deepdown Pile to perform in an  unsatisfactory
    manner.

2.    By participating in the mediation meeting, only  presenting  technical
    evidence, and not agreeing to a financial settlement,  the  possibility
    of any wrongdoing on your part may be explored further.  Also,  it  may
    become evident that Noall Engineers is liable and have  no  grounds  to
    seek a settlement or complain  to  the  state  Board  of  Registration.
    However, choosing to remain silent may help Dour’s case against you  in
    court, and the legal fees and detrimental effects on  your  career  may
    exceed any potential mediation settlement.

3.    The cost of going to court and dealing with attorneys will be more  in
    the end that the cost of just paying the $55,000.  This geotech company
    should have gotten the contract in writing specifically  listing  their
    responsibilities.  Since it is clear that they haven’t, they better eat
    the cost and not deal with the attorneys,  and  be  extremely  cautious
    around Noall Engineering  in  the  future.   [ed.  note:  there  is  no
    indication that there was not a written contract – there was.  Based on
    normal profit margins, it would take new contracts for other clients in
    excess of $550,000 just to break even, so giving away $55,000 is not  a
    minor issue.]

      [ed. note  for  comments  1-3:  mediation  is  not  litigation  (court
    proceedings); Dour is not suing you, he is trying to  convince  you  to
    bring a bag of money to a settlement hearing.]

4.    You should be willing to contribute a small amount to  the  settlement
    (maybe $20 – $25k) but stand firm on the stance that your firm  is  not
    responsible and should not carry the brunt of the payment.  [ed.  note:
    if your firm is not  responsible,  why  contribute  any  money  to  the
    settlement?  It will take new contracts for other clients in excess  of
    $250,000 just to break even without a profit gain.]

5.    This one I would FIGHT!  Changes made in the  field,  like  improperly
    welding short sections together under another company’s inspector,  are
    not your company’s responsibility.  You were told “not to interact with
    Noall unless specifically requested by NW Developers.”  You should take
    all  your  documentation  to  the  state  Board  of  Registration   for
    Engineers.  Tell them you have been threatened by  another  engineering
    firm, convene the facts in the case and let the chips fall  where  they
    may.  I am on the State Board of Registration in  my  state  and  Noall
    would be in hot water with me for threatening another engineering firm,
    when it appears that Noall was a big part of the problem.  Stand up and
    fight!


Epilogue

As it turns out, you reiterated you position that you had no  responsibility
for the screw-ups in the field, and decided not to appear at  the  mediation
meeting, but told Noall’s attorney that you would be available by  telephone
if technical questions arose needing your input.  They  didn’t  call.   Your
engineering staff was  quite  disturbed,  fearing  that  your  action  would
alienate Noall and there would be no more work from them in the future  (not
that there had been any appreciable work with them in the past).

Some time later you learned that in lieu of  a  monetary  contribution  from
your firm, NW Developers assigned your written contract for the design  (but
not the  inspection)  of  the  piles  to  the  contractor  as  part  of  the
settlement. The contractor felt they could in turn sue you  directly  (since
they now had been legally assigned your contract and you were  no  longer  a
third party in your legal relation to them).  When they got  back  to  their
office after signing the settlement agreement with NW Developers  and  Noall
Engineers, the contractor discovered that you had included a clause  in  the
pile design contract with NW Developers limiting your liability  (the  total
amount the client could sue you for) to $50,000 or your fee,  whichever  was
less (a standard practice for quality engineering firms). You had  completed
your scope of services under the contract and the fee paid to your  firm  by
NW Developers for  completion  of  the  pile  design,  including  the  field
explorations and laboratory testing, was on the order of $20,000.  In  order
to try to recover that amount from you, the contractor would have  to  spend
considerably more in legal fees and court costs, and run the very real  risk
of having their complaint thrown out entirely.   They  did  not  pursue  the
issue any further.

Despite the trepidations of your staff, you  understood  that  in  many/most
cases, meditation is intended to bring opposing parties together  to  effect
a settlement of some sort, which may or may not be totally  satisfactory  to
the individual parties involved, but is considered to  be  far  better  than
expending the funds necessary to take the issue to court, and run  the  risk
of losing even more  money.  Participation  of  the  individual  parties  is
voluntary, and the mediation does not proceed unless a sufficient number  of
key parties participate.  Such mediations usually are  limited  to  one  day
(or perhaps two) with an outside mediator  hearing  each  party  tell  their
side of the story, even if it is not totally factual or  substantiated.  The
issue of who is right and who is wrong is of little consequence.

After the initial presentations by the participants, they are split up  into
separate rooms away from each other, and the mediator  uses  what  s/he  has
heard to convince each of  them  individually  that  it  is  in  their  best
interest to put a sum of money (recommended by the mediator)  into  the  pot
to make the problem go away.  The mediator goes from one  party  to  another
in marathon fashion, bargaining for amounts required to  satisfy  the  total
claim,  using  whatever  legal,  quasi-legal,  psychological  or   emotional
tactics they deem appropriate to convince the  participants  and  bring  the
proceedings  to  a  speedy  resolution.   Once   that   is   achieved,   the
participants sign the agreement and go away, if  not  totally  satisfied  at
least feeling that  they  avoided  spending  unnecessary  large  amounts  on
lawyers, which could never be recovered.

Needless to say your firm did no work for Noall Engineers for several  years
while Mr. Dour was still president.  But then, you had done little, if  any,
work for them previously, ad were not working under a contract with them  on
this project.  It was obvious they were making every attempt they  could  to
take work (the pile installation inspection)  away  from  you  in  order  to
increase their  own  fees,  and  reaped  an  appropriate  reward  for  their
efforts.


