
                      Between a Rock and a Hard Place:
                 Will the Real Culprits Please Step Forward?
                                 (Case 1018)

The mission of the National Institute for Engineering Ethics  (NIEE)  is  to
promote ethics in engineering practice  and  education.   One  component  of
NIEE  is  the  Applied  Ethics  in  Professional  Practice  (AEPP)  program,
providing free engineering  ethics  cases  for  educational  purposes.   The
following case may be reprinted if it is provided  free  of  charge  to  the
engineer or  student.   Written  permission  is  required  if  the  case  is
reprinted for resale.  For more cases and other NIEE  Products  &  Services,
contact  the  National  Institute  for  Engineering   Ethics,   Texas   Tech
University, www.niee.org..  (All reprints must contain these statements)

The Case:
As a new faculty member at a noted university you are  teaching  a  graduate
level  engineering  course.   The  course  requires  that  a  term  project,
including a written report, be  worked  out  in  the  department's  computer
laboratory.  Much to your dismay, you discover that more than  half  of  the
students (7 out of 12) in  the  course  have  turned  in  identical  project
reports.  The font styles are different, but  the  wording  and  punctuation
are identical, including numerous spelling and grammatical errors.

The project was comprehensive and constitutes a significant portion  of  the
final grade for the course.  Grade reports are  due  tomorrow.   Your  boss,
the chair of the department, has already left town and  cannot  be  reached.
His  parting  words  to  you  were  to  grade  the  new  graduate   students
generously,  since  they   depend   on   good   grades   for   scholarships,
assistantships and student visas.  Furthermore, you have heard him say  that
the department needs to keep its numbers up  to  get  laboratory  space  and
faculty salaries (including yours) from the  university,  and  the  graduate
program is vital to this end.

What do you do?

Alternate Approaches and Survey Results for “Between  A  Rock  and  a  Hired
Place…” (Case 1018)
1.    Turn in incomplete grades and require the  students  to  rework  their
    project reports.  (This will demand a great deal of extra time from you
    in addition to the students next semester, which  neither  of  you  can
    afford.)
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  33%

2.    Turn in failing grades for all of the  students  who  appear  to  have
    collaborated on the report.  (This will probably  result  in  lawsuits.
    Neither the department nor the university provides legal  counsel,  and
    you doubt that you can afford the resulting costs on your own.)
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  5%

3.     Divide  the  score  for  the  apparent  effort  by  the   number   of
    collaborators, and turn in grades that reflect the average low level of
    individual work.  (This will result in petitions for changes  in  grade
    for you to handle and justify, and visa and  scholarship  problems  for
    the students involved.)
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  10%

4.    Petition the university to accept late grades until the chair  of  the
    department returns and tells you what to do.   (The  university  policy
    manual indicates, however, that grades are between the student and  the
    instructor.)
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  4%

5.    Report the problem to the Dean of  the  Graduate  School  and  request
    disciplinary action be taken against the students who  appear  to  have
    cheated.  (You have heard that such cases are usually decided in  favor
    of the student, resulting in no grade penalty.  You also wonder if  you
    have sufficient documentation to prove that you told  the  students  in
    writing that cheating will result in a  penalty  -  something  that  is
    required in all disciplinary action cases.)
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  16%

6.    Throw the book at the students involved, since professional  engineers
    must work ethically and the public safety would be jeopardized if  they
    graduated and took jobs as engineers using the same behavior  patterns.
    Give them  the  grades  you  feel  they  actually  deserve  for  having
    participated in the cheating.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  24%

7.    Give the students the benefit of  the  doubt,  since  their  numerical
    computational ability in the projects appears to be adequate,  and  the
    written report is only part of the project.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  1%

8.    Revise the grading scale for the course and  place  more  emphasis  on
    the non-report activities of the students.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  7%

9.    Quit your job - resign from your position at the  university  and  let
    someone else deal with it.  (Even though you have a wife and  kids  who
    depend on your paycheck for food, shelter and clothing.)
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  0%


Forum Comments from Respondents

1.    This situation warrants  investigation.   Will  one  or  more  of  the
    students admit to  what  is  going  on?   Is  this  really  a  case  of
    plagiarism, or is something else going on?   Before  you  make  a  good
    case, you have to have facts.  [editor’s note: the case text  indicates
    that all seven submittals had identical texts, down  to  and  including
    numerous spelling and punctuation errors.]

2.    I would bring the seven students in to the  classroom  and  talk  with
    them and try to find out if they cheated and if they did why.   Try  to
    figure out if the assignment was to [sic] hard.   Trying  to  help  the
    students I feel will out weight [sic] and the other situation [sic].

3.    Call the students in who seem to have cheated.  Conference with  them.
     Find out what you can about the situation.  Throw the book at them and
    see what they are willing to do to make recompense [sic].   Have  mercy
    and let them redo the project even though it will  cost  you  and  them
    time.  The point is to teach them that these things are serious without
    ruining their graduate studies.

4.    You need to find out who was the original  author  of  the  paper  and
    give that person the grade you normally  would  have.   The  other  six
    people need to be given incompletes.   I  strongly  suspect  there  are
    electronic  means  of  determining  who  was   the   original   author.
    Supplement these with interviews and questioning.  You will learn, I am
    sure.  If there is insufficient time to  let  the  other  six  students
    complete the paper, then prepare a supplemental exam for them and  tell
    them the exam is in place of the paper’s grade.  You will probably have
    to work a little overtime to  get  this  done  by  tomorrow,  but  it’s
    important and you can relax then.

5.    Petition the school to accept late grades, then  give  the  option  to
    the students involved to complete a new project to be  turned  in  [in]
    the same time frame allotted for the previous project or to retake  the
    course.

6.    I would take approach #1 [incomplete grades; rework and  resubmit  the
    term paper] but add  the  help  of  TA’s  and/or  other  professors  to
    compensate for the  needed  time  during  the  next  semester  for  the
    instructor.  The lack of time for the students is simply unfortunate.

7.    I would give incomplete grades to  the  perpetrators.   Then  I  would
    meet with each student individually, present the evidence and ask  them
    what  they  did.   If  they  confess,  ask  them  what  they  think  an
    appropriate punishment is, then give them the punishment  you  feel  is
    best, taking into account their suggestion.   If  they  don’t  confess,
    take off some points for not being original in their work and let  them
    go.  If they are in fact guilty, their consciences will inflict  enough
    punishment at some time in the future, not to mention the fact that God
    will not allow them to slide by without proper punishment.

8.    The teacher should write up a lesson plan that centers on  ethics  and
    give it as a short lesson to the class.  Following  which  the  teacher
    should very bluntly  discuss  the  dishonesty  that  took  place.   The
    teacher should explain that cheating is wrong,  whether  or  not  every
    explicit case  is  mentioned  in  the  course  syllabus  or  department
    handbook.  The teacher should then explain what he/she is going  to  do
    and ask for comments from the students.  The teacher needs to be  in  a
    position to help the students.  However, their responsibility for their
    actions must not be taken away by the teacher or  anyone  else.   Since
    the teacher is newly hired, it might be more appropriate to  allow  the
    final decision to be made with the help of the  Dean  of  the  Graduate
    School, in order to be honest, but also to be in good standing with the
    students and  faculty.   [editor’s  note:  the  students  are  graduate
    students.  It is a sad commentary to have to give a lecture  on  ethics
    and ask for student comments for such a situation  in  graduate  school
    (or undergraduate school, for that matter). Responsible faculty do  not
    need to defer decisions to the Dean or to be “in good standing with the
    students and faculty”.]

9.    Discuss the problem with the Dean of  the  School  of  Engineering  as
    well as the Dean of the Graduate School.  Explain that  cheating  is  a
    serious offense.  Let them look at the reports and see that there is an
    issue that needs addressed [sic] with the students.  There is usually a
    standard university policy on cheating which is normally on the  course
    syllabus.  [editor’s note: hopefully it is not necessary to explain  to
    either dean that cheating is a serious offense!]

10.   “Operating under the assumption that  most  Universities  now  require
    that a cheating/plagerism statement be included in the  cource  sylabus
    and cource catalog therefore the  students  know  the  rules.   If  the
    assignment  was  truly  an  individual  assignment,  unlike  the   real
    engineering working world where most tasks are performed in teams,  the
    students should be dealt with by the proper authority,  which  in  this
    case appears to be the Dean of the  Graduate  Schools.   Undoubtibly  I
    (the prof) would be required to present my case but this should  be  my
    duty.  Being currently in the academic arena, I  know  that  there  are
    more guidelines and details that need to be presented to make the  best
    judgement on  this  case.   Many  universities  have  Honor  Codes  and
    strickter regulations to prevent legal action.  With  the  little  info
    provided, I feel this is the best coarce of action  [sic]”.   [editor’s
    note: based on more than 35 years of experience in the  real  world  of
    consulting engineering  practice,   most  engineering  tasks  are  done
    individually, even if in a team setting.  Also, in the  real  world  of
    engineering, concise syntax  and  proper  spelling  are  mandatory  for
    successful project communications with team members, the client and the
    public.]

11.   It seems when the teacher  was  making  the  assignment  for  a  “Team
    Project” more emphasis should have been made on the  fact  the  teacher
    wanted completely individual reports.  In addition to this, the teacher
    should not have required the reports to be written in  the  same  room.
    When you require students to do team work and write  a  report  on  the
    team work  in  a  lab  together,  of  course  there  will  be  lots  of
    similarities in the papers.  [editor’s note: there is no indication  in
    the description of this case that the paper was to be  a  team  effort,
    only that it was to be done in the computer lab – assumably because the
    applicable computer software was resident in that  lab.   Notably,  the
    text indicated that it was a “term  project”,  not  a  “team  project”.
    Perhaps more careful cognizance of the words used would be  appropriate
    in this instance before offering an alternate solution.]

12.   Lecture the [involved] students on cheating and give them all a  grade
    of D on their term project.  Tell the students that this is their  only
    warning and that the next incident will  result  in  expulsion.   Also,
    tell them that you will inform the other members of the faculty of this
    incident.

13.   I would give them a failing grade for that exam.  No good  comes  from
    dishonesty; not for the school, not for the  department,  not  for  the
    students, not for society!

14.   You have no choice but to fail all  of  the  [involved]  students  and
    demand disciplinary action.

15.   They are graduate students.  If they can’t be trusted  not  to  cheat,
    they shouldn’t be in grad school.  That’s the bottom line.   They  must
    be pretty desperate if they think the teacher is going to fall for that
    one!!!

16.   This is an easy one.  Cheating is rampart, even  in  Graduate  School.
    Do you make a point of it now or do you let them get fired  from  their
    first job because of similar unethical actions?  You  should  give  the
    seven copiers a “ZERO” for  the  project  and  calculate  their  course
    grades accordingly, even if they all receive “F’s”.   There  cannot  be
    any compromise.  What is right is right!  This is the way it  would  be
    enforced  at  my  university  [where  I  am  the  Associate   Dean   of
    Engineering].

17.   Interestingly, I had personal involvement as a  faculty  member  in  a
    similar case.  I had caught students cheating  in  this  fashion  on  a
    homework assignment, divided the grade among the cheating students, and
    explained why  such  behavior  would  not  be  tolerated.   These  same
    students were caught cheating on  an  exam  in  another  class  in  the
    department the next  week.   That  faculty  member  gave  the  cheating
    students zeros on the  exam,  and  the  department  graduate  committee
    initiated proceedings to drop the  students  from  the  program  (which
    eventually occurred).  Both of us faculty involved were untenured,  and
    the  pressures  to  maintain  high  graduate  enrollment  are  just  as
    described in the case study.  However, there was never  any  hesitation
    from our department chair or graduate committee in supporting us in our
    decision to treat this as a serious breach of ethics.  It did make  the
    entire quarter quite stressful, because  the  students  were  still  in
    class while their cases proceeded.   This meant  administering  quizzes
    and exams in a fashion to eliminate any question  of  cheating  (closed
    books, closed notes, all personal belongings to be left at the front of
    the room, seating assigned and students well separated).   My  syllabus
    has always referred students to  the  university  student  handbook  to
    learn how cheating may be dealt with.  I now include a  larger  written
    policy on what I consider to be cheating and how I may  deal  with  it,
    and discuss it at length on the first day of class.  I  also  warn  the
    students that students found cheating were dropped from the program  in
    the recent past, and had to go home and explain to their families  what
    had happened.   Interestingly, the students dropped  from  the  program
    were all from the same [undergraduate]  university,  and  we  have  not
    since received any applications from that university.




Epilogue

The faculty member involved in this case elected to  divide  the  score  for
the apparent effort on the written report  by  the  number  of  plagiarizing
students (7), using the result in calculating  the  course  grades  for  the
individual students involved (Alternate Approach 3).   Nonetheless,  he  was
then directed by the department chair to give the students  the  benefit  of
the doubt (Alternate Approach 7).  As a result, the faculty  member  elected
to submit his resignation rather than continue being involved in  situations
which comprised his integrity and professional  ethics  (Alternate  Approach
9).  Despite the potential financial difficulty in  supporting  his  family,
he was hired  quickly  and  has  continued  successfully  in  a  responsible
position outside of academia  where  his  conduct  and  ethical  posture  is
recognized as an asset.

