
                      Between a Buck and a Hired Place
                                 (Case 1029)

The mission of the National Institute for Engineering Ethics  (NIEE)  is  to
promote ethics in engineering practice  and  education.   One  component  of
NIEE  is  the  Applied  Ethics  in  Professional  Practice  (AEPP)  program,
providing free engineering  ethics  cases  for  educational  purposes.   The
following case may be reprinted if it is provided  free  of  charge  to  the
engineer or  student.   Written  permission  is  required  if  the  case  is
reprinted for resale.  For more cases and other NIEE  Products  &  Services,
contact  the  National  Institute  for  Engineering   Ethics,   Texas   Tech
University, www.niee.org..  (All reprints must contain these statements)

The Case:
Clayton is the Director of  Public  Works  in  Springfield,  a  medium-sized
rural town with a stable population.  A licensed engineer, he has held  this
position for fifteen years and is highly regarded by  his  peers  and  well-
liked by those he supervises.

Besides  Clayton,  the  other  full  time  employees  in  the  Public  Works
department include the City Engineer/  Deputy  Director  for  Public  Works,
plus two assistant engineers,  a  special  projects  coordinator,  a  survey
crew, three inspectors, and an executive secretary, Eleanor.  All  employees
are on the city merit system.  Eleanor is 55 years old  and  has  worked  in
the Public Works department in Springfield for 35 years.  Earlier  directors
have seen her as indispensable,  and  she  has  worked  more  as  an  office
manager or administrative assistant than as a clerical worker.

In the last five years, however, things have not gone well for  Eleanor.   A
series of family tragedies has left her feeling beaten  down.   Her  husband
had a stroke one year ago and is now an invalid.  She and her  husband  have
no children, and it is only her salary and health insurance  that  keep  him
from a lower quality nursing care home.  Eleanor herself suffers  from  poor
health, and now has only a fraction of the energy she  used  to  have,  this
due to the strain of looking  after  her  husband  every  day,  as  well  as
keeping up their house by herself.

Clayton is sympathetic to the problems that Eleanor is having.  He is  aware
of the contributions she made to the Public Works department  in  the  past.
For years, he  believes,  she  was  underpaid.   Her  actual  worth  to  the
department was much greater than any rating she could have received  in  the
old sex-biased system.  Because of  her  poor  health  and  other  problems,
however, it is now questionable  whether  she  minimally  achieves  what  is
technically required in her position as an executive secretary (her  present
merit position).

Considering these things, Clayton has kept Eleanor on the  payroll  but  six
months ago hired another secretary, Pauline,  part-time  for  30  hours  per
week, to compensate.  Eleanor now spends more of her time as a  receptionist
than as an executive secretary.  While Pauline has expressed  no  resentment
to anyone, she does notice she is  doing  all  the  work  while  Eleanor  is
getting executive secretary pay for doing essentially nothing.

To further complicate matters, one of the largest employers  in  the  region
recently shut its doors, going  off  the  tax  rolls  and  cutting  about  8
percent of the local jobs in Springfield.  The ripple  effect  is  projected
to reduce next year’s tax revenue by 15 percent  and  the  Springfield  City
Council has demanded that the City Manager make the budget balance.

The ambitious new City Engineer/ Deputy Director for  Public  Works,  Allan,
who just completed an executive MBA program and has  his  sights  set  on  a
high-profile public works career in the nearby state capitol, meets  monthly
with Clayton to discuss project issues and  department  business.   At  this
month’s meeting, Allan informs Clayton that he thinks Eleanor is  rated  too
high for the work she presently does and that the  Public  Works  department
is not getting its money’s worth out of her.  In light  of  budgetary  needs
that the department has, Allan  proposes  letting  Eleanor  go.   There  are
measurable  skills  and  reasonable  expectations   that   she   no   longer
demonstrates competence in.

Clayton agrees that logically, the merit system, and the good of the  Public
Works department, seem to dictate such a decision.  He feels, however,  that
the department owes Eleanor some help in her more troubled times,  at  least
until  she  is  eligible  to  collect  her  pension.   The   civil   service
regulations don’t give Clayton much flexibility.  He can keep Eleanor on  in
her present position, or let her go with minimal benefits.  What  should  he
do?

Note:
This  case  is  based  on  “Compassion  Case:  For  Loyal  Service—A  Humane
Resource” by the  Public  Administration  at  the  University  of  Arkansas,
revised 7/19/96, and is used with permission.

Alternate Approaches and Survey Results for “Between  a  Buck  and  a  Hired
Place” (Case 1029)
1. Let Eleanor go, immediately.  Clayton’s course of action is clear and  he
   must not be squeamish about it. He has a fiduciary responsibility to  the
   citizens of Springfield that requires him to  terminate  Eleanor  if  her
   performance is sub-standard and counseling is ineffective.  Harsh  as  it
   may seem, the rules  clearly  direct  Clayton  to  concern  himself  with
   Eleanor’s performance. Her personal problems are not within  his  purview
   as director to act on.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 3%

2. Let Eleanor go,  soon.   Clayton  should  take  Allan’s  advice  and  let
   Eleanor go with her earned benefits, being sure that he first takes  time
   to carefully  document  her  case  so  it  cannot  be  construed  as  age
   discrimination.  He should delegate to Allan  and  Pauline  the  task  of
   compiling the necessary documentation.  Harsh as it may seem, this is not
   the welfare department.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 3%

3. Let Eleanor go, unless…    Clayton should talk with Eleanor, explain  the
   negative impact her performance is having on the Department, and give her
   a six-month probationary period in which to improve her performance.  The
   cold facts are that everyone must pull his/her own weight or  leave.   If
   Eleanor does not improve enough  to  warrant  her  current  position  and
   salary, Clayton must let Eleanor go.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 25%

4. Keep Eleanor on, as is.  Eleanor’s loyalty must be rewarded, and  Clayton
   must not be stingy about it.  Eleanor is so well-liked and has  performed
   so well in the past that Clayton can  justifiably  overlook  her  present
   shortcomings, for years if necessary.  There are more than enough  people
   in the office, Allan and Pauline in particular, to help  Eleanor  in  her
   time of need.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 3%

5. Keep Eleanor on, but seek help from  the  City.   Clayton  should  retain
   Eleanor in the department at her current position and salary and  arrange
   for appropriate counseling.  Most  likely  Springfield  has  a  qualified
   psychological  consultant  available  through   their   Human   Resources
   Department who can seek out available sources  of  external  support  for
   Eleanor in caring for her husband and  the  costs  associated  with  that
   care.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 21%

6. Keep Eleanor on, but seek help from Pauline.  Eleanor  should  remain  on
   the payroll in her  current  position  and  salary,  but  Clayton  should
   continue to incrementally transfer Eleanor’s responsibilities to Pauline.
    He should let Pauline know that  she  will  assume  Eleanor's  job  (and
   salary) upon Eleanor's retirement.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 11%

7. Demote Eleanor.  Clayton should keep Eleanor on the payroll till age  62,
   but explain that she will  have  to  take  a  step-down  in  position  to
   receptionist and cannot remain as an  executive  secretary.   While  this
   will mean a reduction  in  pay,  it  is  better  than  nothing  and  will
   supplement her health insurance coverage until she becomes  eligible  for
   Medicare.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 20%

8. Transfer Eleanor.  Clayton should ask the civil service group to  find  a
   job for Eleanor in another department that is less demanding and is  more
   compatible with her age and work abilities, albeit at  lower  pay.   This
   will take some of the pressure off Eleanor, and relieve the Public  Works
   Department of an unnecessary burden.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 9%

9. Reprimand Allan.  Clayton should  inform  Allan  that  the  Public  Works
   Department would likely not exist to provide the opportunities Allan  now
   enjoys were it not for many past years of  selfless  service  by  persons
   such as Eleanor.  Clayton  should  remind  Allan  of  the  importance  of
   loyalty, and require that he take sensitivity training.  Further evidence
   of not being a team player on Allan’s  part  would  be  grounds  for  his
   dismissal.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 4%

10. Hide and Watch.  Clayton is partly, maybe mostly, responsible  for  much
   of Eleanor’s predicament since for the past 15 years, as Director, if  he
   believed Eleanor was underpaid, he had methods of  advancing  her  salary
   that he chose not  to  use.  In  the  name  of  cutting  “waste”  out  of
   government, for which  he  happily  took  full  credit,  Clayton  watched
   Eleanor give 110%  at  menial  pay,  in  effect  mortgaging  her  health,
   motivation, spirit and effectiveness for  the  sake  of  the  Department.
   Clayton’s true motive, then and now,  has  been  self-promotion;  Clayton
   realizes that to comfortably reach his own retirement he  must  keep  the
   City Manager happy.  Citing his favorite line from Casablanca,  “This  is
   the beginning of a beautiful friendship”, Clayton should  quietly  direct
   Allan to deal with the situation (Eleanor) as he (Allan) has proposed.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 1%


Forum Comments from Respondents
1. Demote Eleanor.  Clayton should keep Eleanor on the payroll till age  62,
   but explain that she will  have  to  take  a  step-down  in  position  to
   receptionist and cannot remain as an  executive  secretary.   While  this
   will mean a reduction  in  pay,  it  is  better  than  nothing  and  will
   supplement her health insurance coverage until she becomes  eligible  for
   Medicare.   Most  likely  Springfield  has  a   qualified   psychological
   consultant available through their Human  Resources  Department  who  can
   seek out available sources of external support for Eleanor in caring  for
   her husband and the costs associated with that care.

2. Promote Eleanor, give her a raise, and have her coach  Pauline  to  learn
   the extensive roles of their position.

3. Besides the other two chosen paths, there  are  some  possibilities  that
   Clayton seems to neglect.  While it is true that Eleanor may be  overpaid
   for her current job performance, is it possible that the  budget  may  be
   cut in other ways, maybe not necessarily  in  its  employees  but  in  it
   expenditures?  Also, if Clayton does come to the conclusion that he  must
   fix the Eleanor situation, one very key thing he will have to do is  talk
   to Eleanor about her current job performance and the financial  situation
   of the department.  Clayton needs to inform her of  his  options  as  her
   employer and communicate why  this  is  a  difficult  decision  for  him.
   Pauline may eventually take Eleanor's position and  salary  when  Eleanor
   retires or maybe even makes her own request  for  demotion,  leaving,  or
   otherwise.  But clearly, out of respect for  Eleanor,  she  needs  to  be
   informed of the situation and possible outcomes.

4. Eleanor should be given an early retirement package which saves the  city
   from a great deal of legal grievances.  She will have the time she  needs
   for her husband, and her position can  easily  be  taken  up  by  a  more
   energetic and lower-paid person.  She would probably prefer to retire now
   than continue working.  Logic is no longer what society operates by.  Our
   society is emotionally and irrationally charged.  Even with a good lawyer
   for the city, the juries of today would inevitably harshly  penalize  the
   city with an enormous lawsuit worth more than Eleanor's present wages for
   the next 2000 years.  Early retirement plans are the best compromises  in
   today's increasingly aging work force population.

5. Eleanor should be talked to, and put on probation for a 6  month  period.
   During that time, Clayton should fully assess her performance.  If she is
   unable  to  fulfill  her  job,  she  should  be  demoted,   possibly   to
   receptionist.  She will still keep an income, and will  be  eligible  for
   retirement.

6. Give Eleanor a probationary period in which to prove that  she  can  earn
   her current pay.  If after 4-6 months she proves that she  is  unable  to
   earn the pay that she receives, she should be given  an  appropriate  job
   (and pay) with the company for her skills and workload ability.  She  has
   been loyal to the company and should at least be allowed  to  be  on  the
   payroll until her retirement and pension kicks in if it is her choice  to
   do so.

7. Keep Eleanor on but give her 6 months probation to improve or be  demoted
   to Pauline's position.  Explain to Eleanor that because of her past value
   she will not be let go but that at her current  performance,  she  cannot
   retain her position and pay.

8. Dismiss Eleanor but give her a severance pay package that  would  roughly
   equal the difference between her actual salary and the salary she  should
   have been receiving over the past 15 years.

9. Clayton should talk to Eleanor, and when he  does,  he  should  tell  her
   that if her work does not improve in the next six months, that  she  will
   be demoted, but not fired.

10. Clayton should talk with Eleanor  directly  about  the  problem  of  her
   performance and what solutions might be available to  help  her  personal
   situation.  Eleanor is still a bright woman albeit burned  out;  and  she
   probably knows she is not performing at a high level and that her work is
   being given to another person.  Enlist Eleanor  to  become  part  of  the
   solution.  If she cannot improve within  a  reasonable  time,  provide  a
   position meeting her current performance and at a reduced salary.

11. There is no evidence given  to  indicate  that  Eleanor  has  ever  been
   counseled regarding  her  decline  in  performance  and  the  impact  her
   attendance is having on the department.  Therefore, she must be counseled
   and given a chance to improve, Clayton  should  begin  documentation  and
   progressive discipline up to and including termination.

12. Eleanor should be informed of her negative  effect  on  the  department,
   given time to improve, and given the resources  to  improve.   Given  her
   long-term commitment to the Department, a substantial probationary period
   should be given, perhaps one month for every year worked, or  35  months.
   If you were to view this as a kind of severance pay (in the event that no
   improvement occurred), it certainly would not be out  of  line  with  the
   golden parachutes that executives routinely get.   However  to  ensure  a
   successful outcome, the social service support should be  augmented  with
   significant feedback every six months against a set of benchmarks, agreed
   on by both Clayton and Eleanor.

Comments from Board of Review Members
All managers/supervisors are confronted with this type of  issue  from  time
to time.  Clayton, Director of Public Works, must be fair  to  Eleanor,  but
at the same time, he must meet his obligations to his employer, the City  of
Springfield.  It is unfortunate that Eleanor was  not  properly  compensated
in the earlier days, if such be the case.  But, that is history, and  it  is
not appropriate to try to compensate after the fact.  It may well be  a  bad
reflection on the  performance  review  procedures,  and  Clayton  needs  to
reevaluate the process.  Clayton has an ethical obligation to be  fair  with
Eleanor.  Her personal situation, however, should not be  a  factor  in  the
decision reached.  On the other hand, her prior  service  and  contributions
to the Public Works Department should be considered.  Clayton also  must  be
fair to the Department and its staff.  It is not fair  to  the  other  staff
members to compensate Eleanor for services not  performed.   It  is  assumed
that  the  Department,  or  the  City,  has  an  established  policy  on   a
termination package.  If the policy allows flexibility, then Clayton  should
be as liberal as the policy will permit.  Eleanor  should  not  receive  any
benefits that would not be given to some other person being terminated.

