
                     You Might Be a Redneck Engineer If…
                                 (Case 1035)


The mission of the National Institute for Engineering Ethics  (NIEE)  is  to
promote ethics in engineering practice  and  education.   One  component  of
NIEE  is  the  Applied  Ethics  in  Professional  Practice  (AEPP)  program,
providing free engineering  ethics  cases  for  educational  purposes.   The
following case may be reprinted if it is provided  free  of  charge  to  the
engineer or  student.   Written  permission  is  required  if  the  case  is
reprinted for resale.  For more cases and other NIEE  Products  &  Services,
contact  the  National  Institute  for  Engineering   Ethics,   Texas   Tech
University, www.niee.org..  (All reprints must contain these statements)

The Case:
About 11:00am on a beautiful Fall day, Robert, a project engineer for a mid-
size geotechnical consulting firm in Metropolis,  is  working  at  his  desk
when the phone rings.  The receptionist, Sherry,  states  that  she  has  “a
live one” on the other end and it has  something  to  do  with  geotechnical
work.  This is Robert’s department, so he takes the call.

Walker, a prospective (new) client, has called from the project site on  his
cell phone.  He wants to know if Robert can help with some soil testing  for
“a real nice Kentucky-style horse farm up near Hunter’s Ridge.”

Robert smiles when he thinks of  it.   A  quiet  community  about  75  miles
northwest of Metropolis, Hunter’s Ridge is indeed an ideal  location  for  a
“Kentucky-style” horse farm.  Rolling hills, grassy meadows  with  scattered
trees, occasional streams, and fence-lined  country  roads  offer  just  the
setting for this type of farm.  A site visit would be the perfect  afternoon
get-a-way from the office – maybe he can get lucky.  Still,  Robert  wonders
how big a deal it can be to do geotechnical work for a horse farm.

After a few minutes conversation, Robert gleans  that  Walker  knows  a  lot
about horses, some about construction, and not much  about  the  engineering
design process.  He indeed needs help.  Also, it is no surprise that  Walker
is in a hurry and would like Robert to come  out  this  afternoon  to  “look
things over.”  Deftly putting the phone on HOLD, Robert runs down  the  hall
and quickly apprises his boss/ office  manager,  James,  of  the  situation.
Always on the lookout for new business – his  favorite  expression  is  “you
gotta feed the monster” – James directs Robert to make the site  visit  that
afternoon and to do what it takes to get the commission.

The trip to Hunter’s Ridge is as relaxing and picturesque as Robert knew  it
would be.  As he arrives in the area, Robert notices the  newly-constructed,
white, four-rail horse fence that  seems  to  go  on  forever,  the  cleared
fields, and deep blue stock ponds.  This place has  to  be  several  hundred
acres.  A farm worker in a straw  hat  is  driving  a  tractor  out  in  the
pasture, clearing some stumps.   Also,  Robert  sees  a  new  maroon  pickup
parked up on a hill – Walker’s vehicle – so he enters the site and  proceeds
to the pickup.

Walker, a tall,  lanky,  country  gentleman  with  deeply  tanned  face  and
friendly wrinkles about his eyes, greets  Robert  and  then  spreads  out  a
rudimentary site plan on the hood of the pickup and  explains  the  project.
It will be quite a show-place -- mare and colt barns, an opulent stud  barn,
feed storage and tack buildings, a veterinary clinic,  numerous  stables,  a
maintenance shop, headquarters for the ranch foreman, and on the other  side
of the creek – back in the trees – a 5,000  square-foot  residence  for  the
Owner, a multi-millionaire  who  will  relocate  to  the  farm  once  it  is
constructed.  The horse facilities, especially the mare and stud barns,  are
for thoroughbred racehorses and are  large  heavy  structures,  intended  to
impress with stately woodwork, ornate cupolas, and all the amenities.

It turns out that Walker is not the  Owner  but  the  Construction  Manager.
Walker  explains  that  the  designer  for  the  new  facility,  Chuck,  has
suggested that Walker get some soil testing to make sure  that  he  can  use
“footers” like he would do back in Kentucky.  Also, he states  that  because
of the extensive network of stables, gates, and holding pens, there is  very
little tolerance for movement – no one wants a door to drag  or  a  gate  to
fail to shut perfectly when they are stabling a thoroughbred.  Chuck is  not
on site – he lives in Kentucky and “all he does is horse farms  like  this.”


Having outlined the  overall  scope  of  the  proposed  development,  Walker
immediately asks how much it would cost for Robert to do the  soil  testing,
and when he could start.  While it is not clear  to  Robert  whether  Walker
really understands the engineered design-construction process, it  is  clear
that Walker means business and this  is  no  time  to  bandy  weasel  words.
Pointing to the plan sheet spread out on the  hood  of  the  pickup,  Robert
briefly explains that he’ll have to do two borings for this structure,  four
for that, etc., as well as soil testing and engineering analysis.   He  also
explains that he  will  produce  a  report  with  recommendations,  not  the
foundation plan itself, and that Walker  will  need  to  have  a  structural
engineer do the actual foundation  design.   Walker  acknowledges  this  and
comments  that  “the  footers  are  Chuck’s  department.”   Doing  a   quick
calculation, Robert names a low five-figure fee for the work.

Walker thinks this over and says, “I better talk to Bruce.”  He  then  waves
to the farm worker on the tractor, a stocky man with a  sweat-stained  straw
hat.  Bruce waves back and drives the tractor over to the pickup, and  shuts
the engine off.  Walker briefly summarizes what Robert has  told  him  about
the engineering work, including the five-figure  fee.   Bruce  looks  Robert
over and then asks Walker if he “feels  good  about  it,”  to  which  Walker
replies, “I feel good about it.”  As  Robert  watches  this  interchange  he
notices, curiously, that the substance of the conversation is  whether  what
they are talking about “feels good.”  Not  whether  the  scope  of  work  is
adequate, or if it is what they expected, or if the money seems  reasonable,
or anything cognitive, but only “do you  feel  good  about  it.”   Based  on
Walker’s response, Bruce says, “Go ahead,” and he leaves to get back on  the
tractor.

At this point, Walker turns to Robert with  one  of  those  why-aren’t-your-
people-out-here-right-now looks and says, “OK, get started.”  It  turns  out
that Bruce, the tractor-driving stump-pulling  farm  laborer,  is  also  the
multi-millionaire Owner, and the  project  has  been  approved.   Just  like
that, with feeling.  A little stunned, Robert hurriedly explains that  he’ll
write  up  a  proposal,  fax  it  over  for  signature  “just   to   confirm
everything,” and that he’ll plan to have a drill  crew  out  the  day  after
tomorrow, which he does.

Everything seems to go fine.  Robert obtains  the  soil  test  borings,  and
analyzes the data.  In process, he discovers the site has a couple of  areas
of problem soils and some shallow ground water, and this will  require  some
extensive earthwork – cutting and filling.  However, if done  properly,  the
earthwork should allow Chuck to use footers (lightly-reinforced  spread  and
strip footings) as he is  accustomed.   Robert  phones  Walker  to  explain.
Walker doesn’t quibble but immediately retains Robert’s firm  to  provide  a
full-time soil technician on site to monitor the earthwork.

Here Robert first realizes that Walker has no civil engineer  consultant  on
the project, and no construction  drawings  other  than  Chuck’s  site  plan
showing where the buildings are to be located.  In fact, Walker  appears  to
be acting directly off of what Robert says (over the phone!), which in  this
case amounts to brief guidelines about the excavation  of  several  feet  of
soil beneath the mare barn and replacement  with  select,  engineered  fill.
This is a somewhat complicated process, and Robert fears that Walker may  be
moving a little too fast for his own good.  Robert is not  quite  sure  what
he should do, but Walker is not waiting around – earthwork operations  begin
immediately.

Given the time constraints, Robert goes over the project in detail with  his
technician and directs  him  to  watch  everything  closely  and  to  report
anything “unusual.”  Robert  then  proceeds  to  complete  his  geotechnical
report.  Three days later, the technician calls to say that  the  excavation
was completed without incident, but that it  encountered  ground  water  and
the hole is starting to fill up  with  water.   Later  that  same  day,  who
should show up at Robert’s office but Larry, a  friend  of  Walker’s  and  a
“designer” who has been hired by Walker to do  the  horse  barn  foundations
for Chuck.

Crude and unpretentious, Larry is no engineer but he  has  been  in  contact
with Chuck and he does have some elevation and floor plan  drawings  of  the
largest and most ornate horse  barns  Robert  has  ever  seen.   Noting  how
wonderful it must be to live the life of a stud horse on a farm like this  –
all they do is eat and inseminate mares – Larry states  that  he  has  heard
about some “soil problems” from Walker and will respond accordingly.   Larry
also explains how he plans to deal with the water  in  the  excavation,  and
his approach sounds reasonable.  After discussion of  the  soil  conditions,
geotechnical design issues, and construction issues,  Robert  believes  that
Larry understands what is required for the project.  Larry  leaves  for  the
site with a copy of Robert’s report in hand.

The foundation construction will commence the  following  week,  and  Robert
makes plans to be on site at that time, just  to  have  a  look  at  things.
Arriving just prior to the concrete pour, Robert is greeted by  both  Walker
and Chuck, the barn designer.   Bruce  is  traveling  in  Spain  looking  at
thoroughbred mares, Larry is supposed to arrive on site  later,  and  Walker
is busy and has no time to visit – he has a concrete  pump  and  a  concrete
finishing crew on site and transit mix trucks are starting to arrive.

Immaculately dressed  in  Kentucky-style  western  garb,  Chuck  is  polite,
businesslike, and particular about his barns.  After informing  Robert  that
the first syllable of cupola is  pronounced  “kyōō”  and  not  “kŭp,”  Chuck
privately expresses amazement at the amount  of  steel  and  concrete  being
used for the  foundation.   Larry  has  done  the  foundation  drawings  but
Walker’s construction foreman has them.  So Chuck takes Robert over to  look
at the foundation excavation with the  rebar  cages  in  place,  and  Robert
quickly  realizes  that,  (1)   Larry   has   grossly   misinterpreted   his
geotechnical recommendations, and (2) the foundation is way over-done.

The amount of concrete and steel, together with the  closely-spaced  network
of large foundation beams could take anything but a direct  hit.   Actually,
the foundation probably could take a direct  hit,  and  will  cost  a  small
fortune to build, certainly much more than the simple  footings  Robert  had
envisioned in conjunction with the earthwork.  On  the  other  hand,  Robert
notices several construction issues: the excavations  are  not  as  neat  as
they could  be,  the  rebar  cages  “burn”  the  sides  and  bottom  of  the
excavations in places, and portions of the excavation have  loose  soil  and
water in them.  Because of this  he  is  silently  thankful  for  the  extra
concrete and steel, even though it is overkill.

Thus the concrete for the mare barn is placed,  a  massive  foundation  that
Robert feels is more suitable for a reactor core than a horse barn.   As  he
drives back to Metropolis, Robert can’t help but feel that, although he  has
done his best for his client in providing quality engineering services,  the
client has ultimately gotten a raw deal.  Apart from  his  verbal  earthwork
recommendations, his geotechnical report has largely gone unused.  The  cost
of the geotechnical work  alone  could  have  been  saved  by  reducing  the
concrete and steel in this one barn if  only  the  client  had  a  qualified
design team in place to implement  the  recommendations,  and  a  contractor
sophisticated enough to build them.  But neither is the case, and  the  good
ole’ boy design/construction team seems very tight.

As to the project, the geotechnical work is done and the  earthwork  is  now
complete.  Walker  is  moving  ahead  with  construction  and,  contrary  to
Robert’s recommendations,  Larry  has  not  specified  any  further  quality
control monitoring or testing for the foundations.  Robert’s  work  on  this
project is over.

Yet several other barns, plus  the  residence,  remain  to  be  constructed.
Robert is a little concerned about potential liability that might come  back
on his firm if the buildings do not perform, and here Larry’s massive  over-
design has a calming effect.  But Robert is even more troubled  by  what  he
sees as the waste of labor, concrete, steel, and money  on  a  project  that
could be done so much more efficiently.

What, if anything, should Robert do?

Alternate Approaches and Survey Results  for  “You  Might  Be  A  Redneck
Engineer If…” (Case 1035)
 1. Don’t  Worry,  Be  Happy.   Despite  the  construction  flaws,  Larry’s
    massive, over-designed foundation will ensure  no  life-safety  issues.
    Arguably the project is wasteful, but the  facts  are,  it  is  Bruce’s
    design team and Bruce’s money. If Bruce can  afford  this  thoroughbred
    horse farm, then it should be his prerogative to chose  or  not  choose
    “best practice” engineering.  Robert has the opportunity to enjoy being
    part of a project like they used to be in the  days  before  the  bean-
    counters and lawyers took over.  There is no problem  here,  just  some
    good ole’ boys having a good ole’ time.  Robert has  earned  his  money
    and should celebrate the moment.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 2%

 2. Don’t Worry.  Like the old saying, “You can lead a horse to water,  but
    you cannot make him drink,” Robert cannot control what other people do.
     Robert acted in good faith and even went beyond his normal  duties  to
    assist Walker and Larry by explaining  his  findings  and  recommending
    they seek a competent engineer for additional  project  design.   Other
    than keeping clear notes of  his  observations  in  the  project  file,
    Robert should do nothing.  His task is complete, and everything  Robert
    has done is morally and professionally defensible.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 6%

 3. Worry.  Maybe nothing will go wrong.  But despite the fact that  Walker
    & company seem OK with everything for now, Robert knows that the design-
    construction work being  done  on  Hunter’s  Ridge  does  not  rise  to
    professional  standards.   Robert   and   his   firm   are   the   only
    “professionals” associated with this project.  As such, they  stand  to
    face financial blame in the event of  structural  failure,  and  worse,
    some might claim they are morally at fault for taking advantage  of  an
    uninformed client.  At a minimum there is an image issue, and  maybe  a
    loss-prevention issue not far behind that.  Robert  should  keep  clear
    and detailed notes of his observations in the project file.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 4%

 4. Share the  Responsibility,  with  James.   This  situation  is  out  of
    Robert’s control.  While reasons exist to suggest that the  client  not
    be bothered (yet), Robert should immediately discuss his concerns  with
    James; they should notify legal counsel, and the responsible  principal
    in their firm.  As a group, they should  draft  a  plan  of  action  to
    manage their potential liability exposure and do damage control on  any
    image issues.  Further, they should prepare full documentation of  this
    project for the file, in the event of a problem.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 17%

 5. Talk to Walker, the Construction Manager.  Robert should have a  heart-
    to-heart talk with Walker, his primary contact for  the  project.   The
    point of the conversation should be to explain in friendly, clear,  and
    simple  terms  that  while  what  is  currently  being  done  with  the
    foundations may work, the outcome will be better and a lot of money can
    be saved if Robert’s recommendations (both design and construction) are
    followed more closely.  Robert can make known his willingness  to  help
    out, up to and including  providing  a  list  of  competent  structural
    engineers.  If Walker is unreceptive, document  the  conversation  with
    notes and place them in the project file.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 9%

 6. Talk to Larry, the Structures Guy.  Robert should have a  colleague-to-
    “colleague” talk with Larry.  After all, it appears that Larry  is  the
    team member who is  best  positioned  to  implement  sound  design  and
    construction practice.  The point of  the  conversation  should  be  to
    explain in friendly,  clear,  and  simple  terms  that  while  what  is
    currently being done with the foundations may work, the outcome will be
    better and a lot of money can  be  saved  if  Robert’s  recommendations
    (both design and construction) are followed more closely.  If Larry  is
    unreceptive, document the conversation with notes and place them in the
    project file.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 4%

 7. Talk to Chuck, the Horse Farm Designer.  Robert should have an “off the
    record” talk with Chuck, since in his role as lead designer, Chuck  has
    the most influence over the project.  Plus, Chuck has already picked up
    on the conservatism in the foundation design and he would be  a  better
    person to redirect the design-construction process than going to either
    Larry or Walker.  The point of the conversation should be to explain in
    friendly, clear, and simple terms that while what  is  currently  being
    done with the foundations may work, the outcome will be  better  and  a
    lot of money can be saved if Robert’s recommendations (both design  and
    construction) are followed more  closely.   If  Chuck  is  unreceptive,
    document the conversation with notes and  place  them  in  the  project
    file.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 3%

 8. Talk to Bruce, the Owner.  Robert should have a  high-level  talk  with
    Bruce.  Being a businessman, Bruce  will  be  sure  to  understand  the
    benefit  of  saving  money  for  money’s  sake.   The  point   of   the
    conversation should be to explain in friendly, clear, and simple  terms
    that while what is currently being done with the foundations may  work,
    the outcome will be better and a lot of money can be saved if  Robert’s
    recommendations  (both  design  and  construction)  are  followed  more
    closely.  If Bruce is unreceptive, document the conversation with notes
    and place them in the project file.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 6%

 9. Notify Walker & Bruce, Formally.   Robert  should  write  a  letter  to
    Walker and Bruce (presumably one of them signed his proposal), formally
    stating his concerns about the gross inefficiency of the design on  the
    horse barn foundation.  The letter should explain in  friendly,  clear,
    and simple terms that while what  is  currently  being  done  with  the
    foundations may work, the outcome will be better and a lot of money can
    be saved if Robert’s recommendations (both design and construction) are
    followed more closely.  Further, the letter should  expressly  disclaim
    any  responsibility  for  foundation   performance   because   a   non-
    professional is designing the foundation system.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 43%

10. Report Larry & Chuck, Legally.  This good ole’  boy  design  effort  is
    going to waste a small  fortune,  it  is  placing  undue  liability  on
    Robert’s firm, and it may even get someone hurt.  Robert should not aid
    or abet the unlawful practice of engineering but should report  to  the
    State Board of Licensure that Chuck and  Larry  (if  he  can  determine
    their  full  names  and  business  addresses)  are   practicing   civil
    engineering design work without a license.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 7%

Forum Comments from Respondents
 1. In one sense, Robert has done what he was asked to do, and he has  done
    it well.  However, the burning concern about project waste  should,  at
    least, cause him to contact Walker. If Walker is open to  ideas,  fine.
    If not, Robert should move on  to  the  next  project,  with  notes  of
    everything in his file.

 2. It is unethical to ignore the situation completely because it may cause
    harm in the future; however, it is also not appropriate to talk to  the
    client's client (Bruce).   I  suggest  either  formally  or  informally
    reporting the problem to Walker, documenting the problem,  and  leaving
    it alone at that point.

 3. Robert should report Larry  and  Chuck,  legally  (Response  10).   The
    reason is that both the ASCE and  NSPE  Codes  of  Ethics  specifically
    state that engineers should report persons who are  not  engineers  but
    are providing others with engineering services.

 4. Robert should first talk with Larry, the structures guy  (Response  6).
    If Larry is non-responsive, Robert should talk  with  Walker  (Response
    5).  If that doesn’t work,  Robert  should  notify  Walker  and  Bruce,
    formally  (Response  9)  and  then  report  Larry  and  Chuck  to   the
    authorities (Response 10).
 5. In many areas, short buildings can be designed by "designers"  who  are
    not engineers.  There was no mention of the  owner's  building  permit,
    the review of which would usually ensure  the  design  meets  the  code
    minimums and ensure public safety.

 6. Robert’s biggest mistake was that he failed to meet  with  and  provide
    the report to the person who hired him to perform the study. Robert was
    already concerned that his report would not be well understood  by  his
    client and he  should  have  scheduled  a  meeting  time  and  location
    suitable for briefing the client on details of the project. As a result
    of this oversight, there seems to have been little technical discussion
    between Walker’s design/ construction  team  and  Robert’s  engineering
    firm about how to incorporate the suggested  geotechnical  requirements
    into the basic design. This lack of understanding has now  transgressed
    into an act of self-interpretation by the person tasked with  designing
    the foundation. Dissatisfaction with the outcome may turn into  a  case
    of finger-pointing between Robert and the designer.  Robert should  act
    upon his concerns but tread lightly in a quest to convince  the  owner,
    or each team member for that  matter,  how  and  why  the  construction
    methods used were inefficient. Clearly, we would not expect  Robert  to
    exceed his responsibilities, so he should discuss this matter with  his
    employer before proceeding. Robert’s employer must be allowed to decide
    how, or whether, to extend the business relationship  with  the  owner.
    The  firm  must  also  refer  questions  of  the  qualification  issues
    (construction manager  and  structural  designer)  to  the  appropriate
    sanctioning body. The company could salvage this business  relationship
    by applying a little  more  relationship-building  effort,  but  should
    consider ending it if the client insists on using  unqualified  persons
    to manage the construction and design aspects of the project.

Comments from Board of Review Members
 1. While all of the colorful details make for interesting reading, they do
    get in the way of framing the ethical issue.  Walker, the  seat-of-the-
    pants construction manager; Chuck, the absentee “designer;” Bruce,  the
    arm’s-length  owner;  and  Larry,  the  friend-foundation-designer-non-
    engineer make the scenarios in Robert’s mind even more  scary  but  the
    ethical dilemma would remain even if all of them did not appear  flaky.
    To go right to the point, the project “team” is opaque to  Robert,  who
    has been kept in the dark but whose geotechnical work is supposedly the
    basis for all the others’ work.  Therein lies the ethical issue.

 2. Robert finds himself involved in a  fast-paced,  free-wheeling  design-
    build project without understanding what he was getting into. His first
    step could have been (once he realized what was going to happen) to try
    to put a few brakes on by telling Walker that he  could  probably  help
    save some money if they  took  a  little  more  time  with  the  design
    details. Similarly, that conversation with Chuck and Larry  would  also
    have been appropriate. After  the  fact,  he  should  still  have  that
    conversation -- by mail.  Robert should draft a letter to  Walker  with
    copies to Chuck stating  that  he's  been  happy  to  be  involved,  he
    understands he is finished even though there  are  more  structures  to
    build, he will be happy to help with those if they  like,  and  by  the
    way,  based  on  what  he  saw  with  the  barn,  there  may  be   some
    opportunities to save some costs on the remaining  construction.   Some
    clients care more about schedule and doing  things  the  way  they  are
    comfortable  than  they  do  about  costs.  Robert  should  not   worry
    excessively, but should let them know he has  more  to  offer  if  they
    like. His letter should conclude that he understands that  unless  they
    ask him for more information, and since he won't be on site during  the
    remaining construction, he has no responsibility for  the  construction
    or dealing with changed conditions.  By the way - we don't know whether
    Robert ever got his proposal written and sent to Walker, and if  Walker
    executed a contract for the work.  If  Robert,  in  his  haste  to  get
    started, neglected the paperwork, then things could come back to  haunt
    him...

 3. This "Redneck" case is an interesting  one.   Some  of  the  things  to
    consider are:
      a)    If a farmer wants to build a barn and  some  outbuildings,  does
       the law require that she/he have to engage professionally  qualified
       designers and engineers to prepare  plans  and  guide/observe  their
       construction? There is no indication that  members  of  the  general
       public will be invited to or allowed on the property. It is  likely,
       however, that Bruce  may  extend  private  invitations  to  selected
       individuals. (Farmers, especially high-end horsemen, often  like  to
       show off their 'spreads' and livestock.)

      b)    But, does Bruce have an obligation to his visitors  and  himself
       to assure that his structures and property/liability insurance  will
       protect his  guests?  I  think  this  is  a  personal  and  economic
       obligation, only.

      c)    It  is  clear  that  "Chuck",  the  designer,  has  and  retains
       responsibility  for  the  design  of  the  facilities.  Further,  he
       recognized that he needed some input (are the soils similar to those
       in Kentucky and can conventional spread footings be  used?)  from  a
       local geotechnical engineer. It is obvious;  however,  that  "Chuck"
       has no understanding of foundation or structural engineering.

      d)    It is also very obvious that James, Robert's supervisor and  the
       firm's office manager, has not given consideration to the  potential
       liabilities associated with this assignment. He just wanted  to  put
       another $19,000 on his books!

      e)    If the firm (and the state's  professional  registration  board)
       considers its work on this project to be engineering, who within the
       firm was the responsible professional signing and sealing the report
       (was it Robert or an officer of the firm)?

      f)    The firm has two obligations, first, to its client  to  be  sure
       that he understands the significance of the  firm's  recommendations
       (an ethics issue) and the  apparent  failure  of  the  designer  and
       construction manager to  heed  them,  and  second,  to  protect  its
       shareholders from professional liability risks (an internal business
       issue).  Robert  has  demonstrated  his  understanding  the  second,
       obligation to his employer; the first is not so clear.
            A potential solution to this case is, internally, Robert  should
    tell James directly of his concerns regarding the manner in  which  the
    client is managing the work and the potential liabilities  which  could
    arise from the client's perceived obligations  of  its  "design  team".
    Both James and Robert should discuss the situation with  a  responsible
    partner/principal in the main office and decide on a plan of action for
    meeting both of  the  above-mentioned  obligations.   The  firm  should
    assure that it has appropriate liability language in its  contract  for
    services and reports, to protect its shareholders. The principal should
    also  have  a  heart-to-heart  talk  with  James  with  regard  to  his
    obligations to protect the viability of the firm.
            Follow-up actions with the  client  should  include  an  on-site
    visit by the responsible partner/principal  (or  better  the  CEO)  and
    Robert to explain to the client and his construction manager  (and  the
    designer) the firm's concerns regarding their apparent  misuse  of  the
    firm's recommendations. The discussion should also address  the  matter
    of the client's view of his obligations  to  the  general  public  with
    regard to engaging qualified professional services  for  this  project.
    Such a discussion could be either helpful to  the  client  (because  he
    hadn't been aware of the issues) or it could annoy him.  In  the  first
    case, the client could assemble and appropriately  apply  the  required
    professional assistance. In the second case, the firm's principal would
    be  prepared  to  forward  a  letter  to  the  client  and  the  firm's
    professional-liability insurance carrier documenting the discussions.

 4. This engineering/construction project has the makings of  the  “Perfect
    Storm” with a similar outcome as the crew and ship in the movie of  the
    same name. There is:

      a)    Robert, an  over  zealous  engineer  who  wants  to  secure  the
       commission without proper diligence.

      b)    Walker, an inexperienced construction manager.

      c)    Bruce, an unconcerned, laid-back owner.

      d)    Larry, a non-engineer foundation designer.

            On the assumption that Robert properly scoped and completed  his
    part of the project, it is clear that during the course of the work  he
    became aware of issues and problems with the project.  If so, Robert, a
    professional engineer pledged to protect the safety and welfare of  the
    public and not aid and abet the unlawful practice of engineering,  must
    bring these matters to the attention of the proper authorities.

 5. Some possible outcomes to this Redneck Engineering case are:
      a)    Nothing  goes  wrong  because  of  the  conservative  foundation
       design.

      b)    Someone else designs the remaining foundations and  there  is  a
       problem.

      c)    Problems  could  arise  from  improper  design  or  construction
       techniques - settlement, slab cracking, etc.

      Some of the ethical/ business/ engineering considerations are:

      a)    Robert is not responsible for how people choose to  spend  their
       money.

      b)    Larry is not a professional.

      c)    Hopefully Robert clearly stated the scope  of  his  services  in
       his proposal and disclaimed responsibility for  how  the  report  is
       interpreted.

      d)    If the structures have not been  designed,  how  are  foundation
       loads determined?

      It appears that conservatism in foundation design  is  appropriate  at
    this stage to keep the project on schedule.

 6. Robert seems to be satisfied that the finished product will  adequately
    serve its purpose even though it may be over designed.   No  health  or
    safety issues are  involved.   The  concern  is  an  economic  concern.
    Everyone, except possibly the owner, is aware that  the  foundation  is
    over designed, and the placement conditions are not  what  they  should
    be.  Robert could reasonably conclude  he  has  fulfilled  his  ethical
    obligations.  On the other hand, Robert being a prudent engineer should
    take further action.  He should submit a written report  to  the  owner
    outlining his observations and concerns.  The owner has the  option  of
    asking Robert to provide additional assistance, or the owner may decide
    to do nothing.  It’s the owner’s  decision.   Robert  will  have  fully
    discharged his ethical responsibilities.

