
                           The Fetid Favor Fiasco
                                 (Case 1007)

The mission of the National Institute for Engineering Ethics  (NIEE)  is  to
promote ethics in engineering practice  and  education.   One  component  of
NIEE  is  the  Applied  Ethics  in  Professional  Practice  (AEPP)  program,
providing free engineering  ethics  cases  for  educational  purposes.   The
following case may be reprinted if it is provided  free  of  charge  to  the
engineer or  student.   Written  permission  is  required  if  the  case  is
reprinted for resale.  For more cases and other NIEE  Products  &  Services,
contact  the  National  Institute  for  Engineering   Ethics,   Texas   Tech
University, www.niee.org..  (All reprints must contain these statements)

The Case:
You are an architect with a 10-person firm in Placidville,  in  the  central
part of the state.  Placidville  is  a  small  city  with  a  population  of
83,576, based on a 1996 census.  It also is  the  location  of  the  state's
largest university  (about  23,000  students).   Due  to  the  business  and
recreational opportunities in the state, the population  has  been  steadily
increasing over the past 15 years, and an aggressive  building  program  was
initiated  at  the  university  five  years  ago  to  construct  and   equip
approximately 16 new classroom and laboratory buildings over  the  following
20 years.

Last weekend your wife invited mutual friends,  Ted  and  Alice  Hammer,  to
spend the weekend with you at your cottage on a lake in  the  northern  part
of the state.  Ted is a senior project  manager  with  Quality  Construction
Co., a local commercial and institutional building construction  firm.   His
wife, Alice, is an activist in  the  Placidville  community,  and  generally
known for her on-going campaign for integrity in government.

During the weekend, Alice mentioned that at a recent zoning  board  meeting,
Gus Olson, one of the other board members, told her  that  the  construction
company he works for as a carpenter (Shreud Contractors)  has  assigned  him
as the construction foreman for a garage being built for  Ray  Vandergrafft.
Alice recognized the name and knew  that  Ray  is  one  of  several  project
managers for the Capital Construction Projects  Office  at  the  university.
Gus laughed and said that something as small as a wood-framed garage was  an
unusual project for Shreud Construction, since they normally  were  involved
in heavy steel erection projects for large structures in the region.

Ted interjected that he had heard Shreud Contractors recently was awarded  a
contract with an estimated budget of $500,000 to make  remedial  repairs  to
the steel superstructure of the university's  aging  football  stadium.   He
understood the contract had been awarded directly to Shreud on  a  time-and-
materials basis  to  avoid  the  expense  to  the  university  of  preparing
extensive bid documents and going through a competitive  selection  process.
He said it was interesting that the  garage  construction  for  Vandergrafft
was going on at the same time as the remedial work on the stadium.

In fact, Ted said, he had learned a few years ago  that  his  own  firm  had
previously  been  involved  in  a  similar  situation  when  they  were  the
contractor for a new engineering test facility at the university and at  the
same time had built a large addition to Ray Vandergrafft's  kitchen  because
his wife, Olga, was a gourmet chef.  Ted said he had decided not to make  an
issue of it, since the project had been completed for some time, and he  had
been told that the construction materials and  appliances  for  the  kitchen
had come from surplus materials from the new lab site  and  incentive  gifts
from the laboratory equipment suppliers.   He  also  had  learned  that  the
construction crew worked on the kitchen when there was not enough to  do  at
the new engineering test facility site.

At that point your wife said she had driven by Fred  Facade's  house  a  few
days ago, saw a Shreud pickup truck parked in the driveway  and  noted  that
there was remodeling going on at the house, apparently  to  raise  the  roof
and add more space on the second floor.  Fred is the University Architect.

You have done architectural design work for the university  over  the  years
and have contributed to their alumni giving  campaign.   In  the  past,  you
suspected that some contractors and architects  received  favored  treatment
from the university, especially the Office of the University Architect,  but
this is the first time you have heard anyone detail  a  specific  situation.
You know the University President on a first-name  basis,  as  well  as  the
Vice President for Finance, to whom the University Architect  reports.   You
have also known Fred Facade on a casual basis for more than 18 years.

What, if anything, do you do?

Alternate Approaches and Survey Results for “The Fetid Favor  Fiasco”  (Case
1007)
1.    Do nothing.  You do  not  know  that  there  is  anything  illegal  or
    underhanded going on based on what you have heard so far.  Just because
    Ted Hammer’s firm participated in the  construction  of  Vandergrafft’s
    kitchen a number of years ago, things have changed in the industry  and
    it is highly unlikely anyone would do that kind of thing  in  this  day
    and age.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 1%

2.    Leave it alone.  This sounds like a case of sour grapes  on  the  part
    of Gus Olson for having been put on such  a  small  project  while  the
    really interesting remedial work on the stadium is being carried out by
    others in Shreud Construction.  Also, Ted Hammer is not  about  to  say
    anything supportive of Shreud Contractors anyway, since Shreud got  the
    stadium remedial  repairs  project  handed  to  them  directly  without
    bidding.  After all, Quality Construction and Shreud  Construction  are
    competing contractors in the same town and  often  go  after  the  same
    construction projects.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 1%

3.    Do nothing.  It is commonly recognized that this sort  of  thing  goes
    on all the time, and making an issue about it is not going to  put  you
    in a positive position for more  architectural  design  work  with  the
    university.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 2%

4.    You are outraged!  Call Vandergrafft at his house and  tell  what  you
    have heard.  Also tell him that if you ever hear of his  doing  such  a
    thing again, you’ll raise such a stink that he will be forced to resign
    from his position as a project manager with  the  Capital  Construction
    Projects Office at the University  and  will  have  difficulty  finding
    another job with 2,000 miles, if then.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 0%

5.    Do nothing until you can  get  verification  from  someone  else  that
    Shreud Contractors are working on Vandegrafft’s garage without charging
    for the labor and/or materials.  It may be that Shreud has  a  contract
    with Vandergrafft to build the garage and Gus Olson, not being part  of
    the  Shreud  management  group,  may  be  assuming  things   that   are
    unwarranted or unsubstantiated.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 33%

6.    Arrange with Ted Hammer to have one  of  his  people  ask  around  the
    local carpenters, teamsters and laborers union halls to gather as  much
    information as possible about Shreud doing both the stadium project and
    Vandergrafft’s garage at the same time so that you and Ted  can  put  a
    coherent case together before talking with anyone else.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 6%

7.    Make some discreet inquiries around town,  particularly  among  lumber
    supplies, to see if  either  Vandergrafft  or  Shreud  Contractors  has
    recently purchased lumber and had  it  delivered  to  the  Vandergrafft
    home.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 5%

8.    Arrange for  a  quiet  lunch  away  from  the  campus  with  the  Vice
    President for Finance at the University to discuss what you have heard,
    and to  express  your  concerns  about  what  appears  to  be  kickback
    incentives in the form of labor  and  materials  for  the  Vandergrafft
    garage.  Indicate that you are concerned because you  have  contributed
    to the University’s fund raising campaigns on a regular basis for years
    and feel that your firm has not been getting their fair  share  of  the
    architectural design work at the university.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 1%

9.    Arrange for  a  quiet  lunch  away  from  the  campus  with  the  Vice
    President for Finance at the University to discuss what you have heard,
    and to  express  your  concerns  about  what  appears  to  be  kickback
    incentives in the form of labor  and  materials  for  the  Vandergrafft
    garage.  Indicate that you are concerned because you  have  contributed
    to the University’s fund raising campaigns on a regular basis for years
    and do not like to  see  the  money  spent  on  personal  projects  for
    selected faculty or members of the university’s administration.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 16%

10.   Arrange for lunch with the University President to  discuss  what  you
    have heard, and to express your  concerns  about  what  appears  to  be
    kickback incentives  in  the  form  of  labor  and  materials  for  the
    Vandergrafft garage.  Indicate that you are concerned because you  have
    contributed to the University’s fund raising  campaigns  on  a  regular
    basis for years and feel that your firm has not been getting their fair
    share of the architectural design work at the university.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 1%

11.   Arrange for lunch with the University President to  discuss  what  you
    have heard, and to express your  concerns  about  what  appears  to  be
    kickback incentives  in  the  form  of  labor  and  materials  for  the
    Vandergrafft garage.  Indicate that you are concerned because you  have
    contributed to the University’s fund raising  campaigns  on  a  regular
    basis for years and do not like to see  the  money  spent  on  personal
    projects  for  selected  faculty  or  members   of   the   university’s
    administration.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 12%

12.   Fred Facade is a fellow professional and respected in  the  community.
    He undoubtedly has not realized the appearance he has created, nor  the
    harm it could do to him personally and professionally.  You owe him the
    courtesy of letting him know that you know,  and  giving  him  time  to
    clean up his act.  Take Fred to lunch and have a  heart-to-heart  chat.
    Let him know that it is wrong to accept kickbacks and suggest he find a
    quiet way of terminating his relationship with the contractors.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 18%

13.   You have absolutely no respect for Fred Facade.  He has tarnished  the
    stature of architects in the community and deserves  severe  sanctions.
    You vow to collect as much incriminating evidence as you can  over  the
    next couple  of  weeks,  then  send  it  off  to  the  state  Board  of
    Registration for Architects, as  well  as  the  American  Institute  of
    Architects, and accuse Fred of  unethical  practices.   You  will  also
    demand that his license  be  suspended  pending  a  full  and  thorough
    investigation.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 1%

14.         You  know  that  the  administration  at  the  university  would
    probably not admit the  situation,  especially  if  it  is  a  case  of
    kickbacks and doing  work  under  the  table  for  selected  university
    personnel without  payment  from  these  individuals.   Therefore,  you
    should call the local newspaper publisher and  confidentially  transmit
    the information you obtained last weekend at your cottage about  Shreud
    Contractors, without giving the names of your sources,  but  indicating
    that these individuals are “usually reliable sources of information”.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 1%

15.         Write a letter to the local newspaper  for  publication  on  the
    Letters to the Editor page recounting the information you received last
    weekend (but not naming your  sources),  and  registering  a  heartfelt
    concern about the way the university shows favoritism and does business
    in the  local  community,  at  the  expense  of  the  fund  donors  and
    taxpayers.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 2%

Forum Comments from Respondents
1.    Get the facts.   Cocktail  party  trials  and  convictions  are  often
    reversed by a higher court.

2.    Substantiate the rumors, then notify those who have the  authority  to
    perform a criminal investigation of your suspicions.

3.    Suggest to Ted's wife that she find out what means  is  necessary  for
    the city to justify an investigation of the business being carried  out
    by  the  university.   If  the  facts  are  sufficient,  let  the  city
    investigate.

4.     Remember  the  source  of  the  information.   Ted  is  a   competing
    contractor and likely is carrying some hard feelings about losing a big
    contract.  Alice is an activist who is looking for this sort of  thing,
    so she may be jumping to conclusions because  it  supports  her  cause.
    Either one should not be enlisted to further research the issue.   Make
    inquiries  yourself  or  through  others  who  are  detached  from  the
    situation.  If independent research indicates something  is  going  on,
    report it to the president of the university.

5.    I  have  a  hard  time  believing  kickbacks  are  legal,  so  another
    alternative, which might actually  be  more  ethical  than  giving  the
    university a chance  to  cover  things  up,  might  be  to  report  the
    allegations  to  legal  authorities,  and   let   them   decide   about
    investigating.

6.    Staying anonymous will allow me to separate business from  friendship.
     Fred Façade may be a friend of mine, but his practice is keeping  food
    off of my table.  I'd rather not go to the president or vice  president
    because they could be getting the same kickback and it's  just  not  as
    well known.

7.    In a vaguely similar case, several of my colleagues simply refused  to
    act on allegations of misbehavior without 'proof'.  They also felt that
    attempting to gather more facts about the case ran too large a risk  of
    unfairly harming the reputation of the individual  in  question.   This
    seemed to represent the mainstream ethical thinking in this  particular
    group of colleagues.  In this case, however, I do  not  think  that  it
    would be ethical to ignore the allegations.

8.    You are  obligated  to  make  your  questions  known,  without  making
    accusations and without raising the topic of your  previous  donations.
    Find the lowest ranking person  in  the  university  hierarchy  who  is
    sufficiently independent, and simply tell that  person  what  you  have
    heard and observed.  Make no more direct accusations, but suggest  that
    the issue needs to be explored.   To  ignore  this  is  to  shirk  your
    responsibility as a citizen; to get further involved or to try  to  use
    undue influence is meddling.

9.    Invite both the university president and vice president of finance  to
    a quiet lunch.  During this lunch explain the  rumors  that  have  been
    heard and that the individuals may (or may not) have  good  intentions,
    but that the  outward  appearance  is  very  bad.   It  is  up  to  the
    university to address this issue as it sees appropriate.  I  would  not
    discuss my contributions to the university fund nor that I also  pursue
    work at the university (these are not relevant to  the  situation).   I
    would request that one of the two get back to me to let  me  know  what
    they had found.

10.   The appropriate line of action is to report what  you  have  heard  to
    either  the  Campus  Ethics  Committee  in  written  form,  or  to  the
    President's Office in written form, or both.  A copy  of  the  material
    should be retained for future reference.   It's  not  the  job  of  the
    person reporting alleged incidents to investigate/judicate [sic] cases.

11.   A confidential complain to the  state  architectural  licensing  board
    should be enough to start an investigation.  If there  is  impropriety,
    it will be clearly shown.   The  individuals  involved  deserve  to  be
    investigated as there is an  obligation  to  avoid  the  appearance  of
    impropriety.

12.   Do nothing.  As they do here in California, he (Fred Façade)  will  be
    blessed with praise and promotion and probably get assigned a  teaching
    position with buffered tenure.

13.   I'm not sure what to think about your use of names for parties in  the
    case that give clues about the behavior of the  parties.   For  example
    Vandergrafft, Façade and Shreud are clearly guilty!  I  think  I  might
    prefer to have neutral names (Smith, Jones, Acme) and make my own  mind
    up about their behavior.  In my experience you cannot judge the  ethics
    of someone's actions from their name!

