
                          Hearsay: What's It Worth?
                                 (Case 1013)

The mission of the National Institute for Engineering Ethics  (NIEE)  is  to
promote ethics in engineering practice  and  education.   One  component  of
NIEE  is  the  Applied  Ethics  in  Professional  Practice  (AEPP)  program,
providing free engineering  ethics  cases  for  educational  purposes.   The
following case may be reprinted if it is provided  free  of  charge  to  the
engineer or  student.   Written  permission  is  required  if  the  case  is
reprinted for resale.  For more cases and other NIEE  Products  &  Services,
contact  the  National  Institute  for  Engineering   Ethics,   Texas   Tech
University, www.niee.org..  (All reprints must contain these statements)

The Case:
You are  an  engineer  working  for  Enviro/Universal,  a  large  consulting
engineering firm.  You have recently  completed  a  phase  one  (preliminary
review based on available information)  environmental  site  assessment  for
Americorp, one of the firm’s largest clients.  You  have  been  directed  to
send drafts of the report to the client’s law firm, Dewey, Stickum  &  Howe,
for review prior to issuing the final report.

The property in question is a large shopping mall located in an  area  which
used to be heavily industrialized and is now being converted to  residential
and commercial uses.  The site being investigated is not being sold;  rather
it is being used as collateral  for  a  refinancing  loan  being  sought  by
Americorp from a local lending institution.

In the course of conducting the  research  and  preparing  the  report,  you
happen to have a conversation with an older  gentleman  at  a  nearby  lunch
counter who tells you that the property is known among  long-term  residents
of the neighborhood to be contaminated because of  the  previous  operations
of a creosoting plant on the site many years ago.  The shopping mall,  built
38 years ago, was sited directly over  the  old  creosoting  plant  “because
that’s how they used to do it back then.”

This casual conversation is the only indication of  contamination  you  have
been able to uncover through your research on the site.  As  a  result,  you
prepare  and  submit  a  draft  of  the  report  to  the  Dewey  law   firm,
recommending that the site be the subject of  a  Phase  2  site  assessment,
which will require drilling inside of the existing shopping mall  to  obtain
samples of the soils and groundwater beneath the structure.   Within  a  day
or two the attorney at the Dewey firm  returns  the  draft  report  to  you,
deleting the  part  about  the  alleged  creosoting  contamination  and  the
recommendation  for  additional  testing  in  a  Phase  2  assessment.   Not
understanding  why  this  has  occurred,   you   telephone   Charlie   Howe,
Americorp’s attorney , who tells you that:

a.    The personal information  you  gathered  about  the  alleged  creosote
   plant on the site was only  hearsay,  and  cannot  be  relied  upon.   In
   addition, you were not  requested  to  conduct  such  personal  anecdotal
   research.

b.    The property is not being sold, therefore  Americorp  still  owns  it,
   and they now know about the alleged contamination.

c.    You have a contractual obligation to have the final report,  including
   reasonable changes stipulated by Dewey, Stickum  &  Howe,  completed  and
   delivered by noon today.

d.    The refinancing is set to close later today, and if it does not  close
   the financing will be lost and a new loan will have to be obtained  at  a
   higher rate.  The loan being sought is  to  be  used  to  finance  a  new
   project, which will fail to materialize  (possibly  irrevocably)  without
   this financing.  There will be total damages in the millions  of  dollars
   if the closing does not take place.

e.    If you fail to provide the final report as requested by  the  client’s
   attorneys, you will be sued personally for these damages and neither  you
   nor your firm will ever do work for Americorp again.

You relay this conversation to your manager, who indicates  that  since  you
are providing the client, who is not selling the property,  with  the  final
report, and since the client has all of the information you reported in  the
draft report, it does not matter what the final report says.  He  tells  you
to go ahead and issue the final report as revised by the Dewey  legal  firm,
and strongly suggests that your own future with the firm  will  be  affected
by whether you comply with this directive or not.

What do you decide to do, and why?


Alternate Approaches and Survey Results for  “Hearsay:   What’s  It  Worth?”
(Case 1013)
1.    Charlie Howe and your manager  are  correct.   Unsubstantiated  gossip
    heard at a lunch counter does not belong in an engineering report.   If
    no adverse effects were noticed at the site after  38  years,  probably
    not much is going to come from it.  Make the deletions demanded by Howe
    and get on with your career.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 7%

2.    You decide to comply with Charlie Howe's  demands,  and  after  making
    the requested deletions, sign the report and have it sent to Americorp.
     You also keep in  your  personal  files  at  home  all  the  uncovered
    information, whether documented or not, the original draft report,  the
    returned draft modified by  the  Dewey  firm,  and  a  record  of  your
    discussions with your manager and with Charlie Howe.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 10%

3.    You like to eat, and  finding  another  job  is  not  all  that  easy,
    especially if the word got out that you might be a "problem  employee".
    Therefore you decide to comply with Charlie Howe's demands, but in  the
    report you document your research sources for the  "preliminary  review
    based on available documented information",  leaving  out  the  hearsay
    opinion of the old gentlemen at the lunch counter.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 3%

4.    Make the changes  demanded  by  Howe.   Include  a  statement  in  the
    executive summary at the beginning of the final report that says,  "The
    information  contained  herein  is  the  result  of  an   investigation
    performed under direct contract with Americorp, in accordance with  the
    limited scope of work defined in that contract.   This  information  is
    for the exclusive use of Americorp and no one else may rely on it."  In
    this way you are not certifying anything one way or the  other  to  the
    lending institution.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 17%

5.    Edit the draft report as Charlie Howe wishes, sign and send the  final
    report to Americorp with a copy  to  Howe.   Also  in  the  transmittal
    letter to Howe report the hearsay comments from the lunch  counter  and
    recommend that you be retained to investigate further to see  if  there
    might be any real basis to the allegation.  Pass this by  your  manager
    for his verbal approval.  If he doesn't approve,  then  keep  your  own
    notes of what you were directed to do in your personal files at home.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 20%

6.    Tell your manager you are uncomfortable  issuing  such  a  potentially
    misleading report, but will make the required deletions and  issue  the
    report immediately.  After making the report  revisions,  you  have  it
    delivered to your manager with  a  note  saying,  "I've  made  all  the
    changes you asked me to.  Please review and sign the  report  and  I'll
    make sure it gets to Americorp this afternoon."
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 7%

7.    Tell your manager you are uncomfortable  issuing  such  a  potentially
    misleading report, but will make the required deletions and  issue  the
    report immediately.  You  make  the  requested  changes  and  sign  the
    report.  But before you have it delivered to Americorp, you have one of
    the senior engineers in your group sit in (via speaker phone) on a call
    to Charlie Howe in which you tell Charlie that, although you still have
    reservations regarding the requested deletions as  you  discussed  with
    him this morning, your manager has reviewed your concerns and OK'd  the
    revisions.  You will have the revised  report  delivered  to  Americorp
    with a copy to Charlie, today.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 8%

8.    This type of thing happens all the time.  In this case even though  no
    construction is planned for the site, (so none of the residue from  the
    alleged old creosoting plant  will  be  exposed),  you  are  not  being
    truthful in your report.  The bank putting up the refinancing loan  may
    be liable if anything adverse does occur in the future, and  they  will
    then surely come looking for you.  Tell Howe and you manager  that  you
    are issuing the report as it was originally written, without making the
    deletions.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 14%

9.    This type of thing happens all the time.  You are hired by  a  company
    to do an investigation, then end up  taking  marching  orders  from  an
    attorney with whom you have no contractual agreement and whose  primary
    goal is to insulate their client from any and all  potential  financial
    losses.  It doesn't seem to matter if what  they  tell  you  to  do  is
    ethical or not.  Refuse to do as Charlie Howe demands,  and  tell  your
    manager that your integrity is not for sale.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 9%

10.   This type of thing happens all the time, and it's about  time  someone
    took a definitive stand to stop it.  Tell Charlie Howe and your manager
    that what they want you to do is not honest, and you will  not  do  it.
    Also tell your manager that you will spill the whole  sordid  story  to
    the local newspaper if you experience any adverse reaction at work from
    your decision.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 5%


Forum Comments from Respondents
1.    If the site is found to be contaminated later on, you  could  be  held
    partially responsible for any damages.  Stand up for what is right now,
    and not put off the responsibility until later.

2.    Make the requested deletion, but insert a  statement  that  there  was
    evidence of prior industrialization on the site.  Since it is only  for
    collateral on a loan, it should make  no  difference  (unless  the  new
    project is located on the same site).

3.    In such a case it is important to let "hearsay" information be  known.
     What is ultimately done about it will be in the hands of  the  company
    and financiers.  Legally and ethically, the  paid  for  duty  has  been
    discharged in an "above-the-board" manner.  While the  report  findings
    are, indeed, what was actually found, the additional  "hearsay",  which
    is  undocumented,  is  acknowledged.   It  is  now  possible  for  this
    "hearsay" to be investigated as needed.

4.     Some  additional  follow-up  on  the  hearsay  at  the  time  of  the
    investigation would have been warranted.

5.     The  information  obtained  at  the  lunch  counter  is  hearsay  and
    therefore is not reliable.  The gentleman is not a professional and  is
    in no position to help you with your job.  Hearsay, even though  it  is
    unreliable, often has  some  truth  in  it.   However  conceivable  and
    convincing the information is, it is not your  position  to  make  such
    judgements.  It should be noted that you  may  have  reservations,  but
    your superior is the one to make judgement decisions like that.

6.    Submit the final  report  as  revised  with  the  hearsay  information
    deleted.  However, add a recommendation that a Phase  2  assessment  be
    performed due to the history of the area being heavily industrialized.

7.    The proper thing to do would be to go to your  firm's  top  management
    for a decision.   If  upper  management  decides  to  comply  with  the
    lawyer's demand for revised wording in the report, without any  thought
    for ethical integrity, then you might want  to  think  about  switching
    companies.  You represent your company and your company represents you.
     If you do not believe in the practices of your company and do nothing,
    that speaks to your character.

8.    Regardless of the client, I believe you must perform the task you  are
    asked to do.  If you  lose  that  client  your  reputation  will  still
    proceed [sic] you.

9.    I would be uncomfortable with  the  fact  that  my  manager  would  be
    hinting to me that my future employment  with  the  firm  would  be  in
    jeopardy because I was having an ethical disagreement with  some  other
    company's attorney.  I would hope my manager would want  his  employees
    to be honest in all their dealings and support them in  these  type  of
    situations instead of passing it  off  as  not  very  important.   This
    relationship with the manager is the part that disturbs me the most.

10.   I believe that the  engineer  should  tell  his  manager  that  he  is
    uncomfortable issuing the  report  without  investigating  further  the
    rumor of contamination.  He should mention that what they are doing  is
    dishonest…..He should recommend they allow a  time  frame  for  further
    investigation.  If his proposal is rejected, he should  then  make  the
    requested changes to the report, including  the  following  disclaimer,
    "The information contained herein is the  result  of  an  investigation
    performed under direct contract with Americorp in accordance  with  the
    limited scope of work defined in that contract.   This  information  is
    for the exclusive use of Americorp and no one else  may  rely  on  it."
    The engineer should not sign the final report.  He  should  submit  the
    report to his manager.  His manager should review and sign the  report.
    The engineer should keep careful personal and company  records  of  all
    his findings.

11.    It  is  absolutely  essential  that  the  unsubstantiated   date   be
    substantiated one way or the other -- if necessary, at your own expense
    and on your own  time.   Then  write  the  report  accordingly.   In  a
    developed area, records exist for more than 38 years.  The truth can be
    substantiated.

12.   You might have your lawyer call Howe and discuss a  complaint  to  the
    State Bar.  Alternate 8 hits  the  point  about  the  bank  potentially
    having to take the responsibility for the property.   Would  they  make
    the  loan  if  they  thought  there   was   possibility   of   creosote
    contamination?  Probably not.  Therefore we are now  discussing  FRAUD.
    It's not nice for engineers or lawyers to be involved in  such  things.
    I really hate all these cases you have where  we  are  dealing  with  a
    client who appears to be as crooked as  a  dog's  hind  leg.   I  guess
    people are like that though.  Let's just not  drag  ourselves  down  to
    their level.

13.   First, you have a phase one report  based  on  available  information.
    Interviews with lay people - users, tenants (or in this  case,  an  old
    gentleman) are included in such reports.  The gentleman might (or might
    not) know what he is talking about, but the engineer  must  acknowledge
    the interview in the report, but put it in an appendix and  state  what
    you think about it.  Second, the report is being used as collateral  on
    a loan.  Ever dealt with the FDIC after a bank  has  failed?   They  go
    after everybody who they think  "tended  to  mislead  the  government,"
    including the client, the lawyers and your boss, and if you are stupid,
    probably you.  Thirdly, you honestly submit the report recommending the
    site be subject to a Phase 2 assessment, but do you state  the  reason?
    Yes, you must.  Fourth the Dewey lawyer  physically  deletes  the  part
    about the contamination and your recommendations.  No lawyer  would  be
    this stupid, because he is practicing engineering without a license  if
    he is the one who makes the physical changes.   But  let's  assume  the
    lawyer demands,  orally,  that  you  remove  the  offending  provisions
    because they are based on "hearsay".  Lawyers  sometimes  have  a  hard
    time understanding  that  information  gleaned  during  an  engineering
    interview is not hearsay to an engineer, it is "information  gathered",
    even though the court, filled with lawyers, might disagree.  Fifth, the
    fact that you  were  not  asked  to  conduct  such  personal  anecdotal
    research is incorrect, in that you should conduct interviews  and  they
    are not anecdotal.  Sixth, the deadline of finishing the report by noon
    today, including inserting the changes demanded by the lawyers,  should
    be postponed until the issue is resolved.  As noted above, the  lawyers
    cannot demand changes to an engineering report that you seal (they  can
    suggest changes).  Seventh, unless your boss is stupid and  has  agreed
    in writing to accept damages of millions of dollars for your failure to
    deliver before noon, your failure to deliver  the  tampered  report  by
    that time will not result in any monetary  loss  to  your  boss'  firm,
    other  than  the  cost  of  your  boss'  lawyer.   Eighth,  unless  you
    personally signed an agreement  stipulating  that  you  are  personally
    responsible for failure to perform, you won't  be  paying  any  damages
    either, and if you get  sued  and  your  firm  refuses  to  cover  your
    expenses, sue your firm as well.  Ninth,  if  your  client  (Americorp)
    wants a tampered report so that they  can  trick  the  bank,  you  want
    nothing to do with the client.  Tenth, you replay the lawyer's  threats
    to your manager, who also threatens you with your future in  the  firm.
    This means that your PE seal on the report is the only thing any of the
    people want, including your boss  and  your  manager,  and  if  anybody
    hangs, it will be you.  Don't worry.  This happens to  young  engineers
    (it happened to me more than once).  Your boss and the manager normally
    refuse to seal the report because they figure you have minimal  assets,
    and they need a young patsy, probably the least financially capable new
    engineer in the office, to take the responsibility.  Ever wonder why so
    many new engineers  seal  big  projects?   Client  threats  and  lawyer
    threats are nothing new  to  the  young  engineer.   Hold  on  to  your
    integrity, and issue the report your way, with your interview with  the
    old gentleman, with your recommendations, and with  your  seal,  before
    noon.  If it costs you your job, then you didn't want to be working for
    such people anyway.  Steer clear of the dark side of the  force.   When
    the others go down, you won't be pulled down with them.

14.   If Americorp defaults on the bank loan, the bank becomes the owner  of
    the property, and everything on/in it.  As  a  result,  the  bank  then
    becomes  legally  responsible  for  any  negative  impact  due  to  the
    contamination, especially if they decide to develop it for a  different
    purpose.  Should that occur, they will be knocking on your door for you
    and your firm to assume the cost of remediating the  site,  because  of
    your report.  Notably, this is a situation over which you would have no
    control, but could have been avoided.

15.   The real issue here is whether to uphold honesty as an ethical  value,
    as well as to decide if you are sufficiently  knowledgeable  to  assume
    the legal responsibility for the health, safety and welfare  of  others
    if the contamination is present at the site in such quantity as to have
    an adverse impact on the public.  The  financial  implications  to  the
    developer are his responsibilities, not yours.   You  do  not  own  the
    site, nor do you have a financial (profit-motivated)  interest  in  it.
    Once you start cutting corners or deleting information from reports  at
    the whim of clients who think they might be adversely impacted by  your
    report, you and your reputation  start  sliding  irrevocably  down  the
    slippery slope.

