

                           The Joy of Being Wanted

                                 (Case 1003)

The mission of the National Institute for Engineering Ethics  (NIEE)  is  to
promote ethics in engineering practice  and  education.   One  component  of
NIEE  is  the  Applied  Ethics  in  Professional  Practice  (AEPP)  program,
providing free engineering  ethics  cases  for  educational  purposes.   The
following case may be reprinted if it is provided  free  of  charge  to  the
engineer or  student.   Written  permission  is  required  if  the  case  is
reprinted for resale.  For more cases and other NIEE  Products  &  Services,
contact  the  National  Institute  for  Engineering   Ethics,   Texas   Tech
University, www.niee.org..  (All reprints must contain these statements)

The Case:
You graduated with outstanding  grades  from  one  of  the  top  engineering
schools in the country about six years ago, went to work  for  a  well-known
engineering design firm in the local area and  have  progressed  rapidly  to
the point where you are doing some project management work and your  clients
speak highly of your capabilities.

You have been so intent on furthering your career that until a  year  or  so
ago, you had little social life.  However, through a mutual friend  at  work
you were introduced to someone who became very special in your life and  you
have decided to get married.  In your discussions with your  future  spouse,
you both have decided to look for employment in an area of the country  some
2,500 miles away, but a lot closer to your prospective spouse’s  family,  as
well as many of the outdoor attractions you  both  enjoy,  such  as  skiing,
backpacking and bicycling.

You informed your present employer of your plans to relocate  several  weeks
ago, and you recently contacted the one firm in the new  location  that  you
knew.  They asked you to come for  an  interview,  sent  you  money  for  an
airline ticket, as well as a separate allowance  check  for  your  expenses,
and you went to see them.   While  you  were  there,  you  decided  to  stay
another day or two, called three other firms in  that  city  and  talked  to
each of them in person.  As a result of these interviews, each of  the  four
companies has indicated that they will most likely make you an offer  for  a
very good position at an excellent salary.

You were so impressed with the new area that you now have  no  doubts  about
moving there.  In addition, it is  now  especially  important  that  you  do
secure a position in  the  new  location  since  your  intended  spouse  has
completed arrangements to be transferred to an office in that city with  the
company for which s/he is presently employed.  Since you have  not  received
a firm offer from any of the engineering firms as yet, you  have  told  each
one of them individually that you are very much interested  in  working  for
their company.  You feel positive that you will soon have firm  offers  from
all four of the firms.

While you wait to hear from these firms, how do  you  feel  about  your  job
interview process, and is there anything else you should do at this point?


Alternate Approaches and Survey Results for “The Joy of Being Wanted”  (Case
1003)
1.    I feel fine about it.  There wasn’t  anything  wrong  with  scheduling
    other interviews although one firm paid for the airline ticket and gave
    me expense money, they would have had to pay the same amount even if  I
    didn’t see the other firms.  I was in the area and  should  have  taken
    advantage of the situation.  When you are good  at  what  you  do,  you
    deserve options that are available to you.  There is nothing else to do
    except wait for  the  job  offers  to  come  in  and  choose  the  most
    desirable.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  10%

2.    I should call the first  company  and  tell  them  that  while  I  was
    visiting there, I took the opportunity to interview  with  three  other
    firms, so they are aware that I am not  putting  all  my  eggs  in  one
    basket.  Perhaps that will prod them into making me an offer soon.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  7%

3.    I feel fine about it, however I want to make a  decision  as  soon  as
    possible.  I should contact each of the firms  I  interviewed  to  tell
    them that my intended spouse has already made arrangements to  relocate
    and that I need a decision, one way or the other,  from  each  of  them
    within a week.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  1%

4.    I should call the first firm and  tell  them  that  I  am  considering
    offers than might come in from other firms in the area, but that I feel
    an obligation  to  consider  their  offer  first.   However,  since  my
    intended spouse has already made arrangements to relocate, I do need  a
    firm offer within a week.  If their offer is fair, I  will  accept  and
    will not consider offers from the other firms.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  10%

5.    By staying an extra couple of days, the trip cost  me  more  than  the
    first company provided.  This is an excellent opportunity to see  if  I
    can collect additional expense money by letting each of the other three
    firms know what my expenses were on the  basis  of  having  interviewed
    with them only.  Hopefully they will each send  a  reimbursement  check
    for the indicated expenses.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  0%

6.    I’m a bit uneasy about having used  the  airline  ticket  and  expense
    check from the first firm  and seeing three additional firms during the
    same trip.  Nonetheless, I should wait to  see  if  the  first  company
    offers me the job I want over the  others,  and  if  so,  forget  about
    mentioning my having seen the other firms.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  0%

7.    I realize that even in large cities, the engineering community can  be
    relatively small and that even competitors talk to one another.   As  a
    result, I should inform the first company that  I  did  interview  with
    other firms in the area, and  that  I  am  willing  to  reimburse  them
    whatever  portion  of  the  airline  and  expenses  money   they   feel
    appropriate.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  12%

8.    I should inform the first company that  I  did  interview  with  other
    firms in the area, and that I am willing to reimburse them  the  entire
    amount of the airline and expenses money they sent to me in order to be
    fair and impartial (and to not be bound by perceived obligations  which
    may cloud my final job acceptance decision).
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  22%

9.    I should inform the first company that  I  did  interview  with  other
    firms in the area, and that should I accept  a  position  with  another
    firm, I will suggest to that firm that they reimburse  the  first  firm
    for the airline and expenses money originally sent to me for the  trip.


      Percentage of votes agreeing:  2%

10.   I should inform the first company that  I  did  interview  with  other
    firms in the area, and that I should I accept a position  with  another
    firm, I will personally reimburse the first firm for  the  airline  and
    expenses money originally sent to me for the trip.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  21%

11.   I should discuss my interview trip and  the  present  status  in  full
    with my intended spouse prior to taking additional steps, if any.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  15%


Forum Comments from Respondents

1.    If the engineer really has had  no  social  life  over  the  past  six
    years, and really has done as well as indicated, the cost to  reimburse
    the travel expenses should not be any hardship.  The cost of travel for
    purpose of interviews is a good investment, since ultimately s/he  will
    be receiving a good salary.  As a result, s/he shouldn’t be  trying  to
    get a “freebie”.

2.    If the spouse-to-be already has a position  secured,  there  shouldn’t
    be any urgency about landing a job in the  next  week.   Wait  for  the
    firms to make up their minds, and don’t risk coming to a company with a
    “bad feeling” that you have put them over some sort of barrel.

3.    Call the first firm and explain what a fool you were for  interviewing
    with other firms.  Beg forgiveness and send a check to them right  away
    for all the expenses they paid.   Ask  them  to  please  consider  your
    application for employment and desire to work  for  them,  disregarding
    your poor judgment in this case.

4.    By accepting the expense paid  trip,  an  implied  contract  has  been
    entered into by the parties.  By interviewing other firms  the  implied
    obligation to interview the only original firm has  been  broken.   The
    first firm should be informed and an offer to reimburse them extended.

5.    A combination of solutions 4 and 7 would  satisfy  my  concerns.   You
    have been truthful with the first company and  expressed  a  desire  to
    share the expenses.  You have also stated your intentions in  a  direct
    and honest manner.

6.    Instead of offering to pay back all of the expenses, I would  write  a
    cheque for 75% of only the  airfare  (no  reimbursement  of  the  other
    expenses portion).  In the cover letter, I would  inform  them  that  I
    will be moving to the  new  area,  since  my  future  spouse  has  been
    relocated to that city.

7.    Even though I chose solution 8, I do believe  I  would  wait  for  the
    first company to ask for reimbursement before  I  freely  returned  the
    money.

8.    You just have to use basic negotiation skills in this  case.   Because
    s/he found other offers while s/he was there  does  not  make  anything
    improper.  S/he was simply smart  and  making  the  most  of  the  time
    available.  It is not smart  to  tell  the  firms  that  an  answer  is
    required within a week because the spouse-to-be has been  relocated  to
    that city.  That would give more power to the prospective employers  to
    suggest a lower salary.  Wanting to give the original company the  best
    chance because they paid for airfare and expenses is  a  typical  “nice
    guy” approach where the end result is that  the  nice  guy  gets  taken
    because s/he’s too timid to make  a  move  for  the  other  prospective
    employers who could be substantially more lucrative.

9.    I would return the expenses and the  amount  of  the  airline  ticket,
    with a letter expressing my thanks and continued interest in the  firm.
    Explain that since I did visit other firms in the  area,  I  would  not
    feel right accepting their generosity.  In addition, I am so  impressed
    with the level of professionalism of the firm  that  I  would  strongly
    consider an offer.

10.   The firm paying the airfare and expenses should  be  given  the  first
    opportunity to present  an  offer  and  that  offer  should  be  fairly
    evaluated first.  If it is not competitive  with  others  that  may  be
    received,  the  first  firm  should  be  so  notified  and  given   the
    opportunity to make another offer.  If the firm does not choose  to  do
    so, the airfare and trip expenses should be returned to the firm and an
    offer from another firm accepted.

11.   So many people these days are willing to pass responsibility off  onto
    someone else.   The  applicant  took  the  plane  ticket  for  the  one
    interview.  If s/he truly wants to live in that community, s/he  should
    take some time off from work, and scout out  the  spot.   It’s  not  an
    employer’s job to pave the road you choose.

12.   Ohh, this is a good one!  I am in the same predicament.   I  am  going
    to an interview for an entry level position in Denver with a firm,  but
    at the same time I thought about using an extra day to interview with a
    contact I met this summer for another type of position in  a  different
    company.  My predicament (or is it?) is that I want to  stay  an  extra
    day - - so all I would be requesting is that the first company push  my
    return flight date back another day, with no extra expense to  be  paid
    by them.  I would stay at a friend’s place for the extra night, and pay
    for my own meals for the extra day, so if you really thought about  it,
    all the first company is paying for is my flight and for the  two  days
    (not the extra one) that I will be in that city.

    It wouldn’t be unethical, since I was going to be flown  there  in  the
    first place.  I wouldn’t be lying to them if I told  them  that  I  was
    going to take care of personal business and I  have  already  asked  to
    others about this situation and they agree.

13.   It would have been better to contact the  other  firms  prior  to  the
    visit to see if they were willing to share the travel expenses.

14.   No employer wants an employee who would  prefer  to  be  with  another
    firm, therefore s/he should follow solution 10.  In  negotiations  with
    other firms, s/he should tell them of this obligation and ask  if  this
    would be considered in their offers.  There remains the  obligation  to
    the first firm, notwithstanding reimbursement from others.

15.   Be more up front in the  beginning  with  the  first  firm  and  don’t
    schedule the competing interviews so closely.  Or, as is actually  done
    by some departments, allow the inviting company  to  make  your  travel
    arrangements for you.  Also keep  discussing  these  issues  with  your
    spouse-to-be, since surely  they  will  have  justifiable  reservations
    about making such a serious commitment  to  someone  who  would  be  so
    blithely  fickle,  opportunistic  and  egoistic.   I  don’t  like  this
    engineer enough to identify with him/her much longer!!

