
                                Roman Holiday
                                 (Case 1042)

The mission of the National Institute for Engineering Ethics  (NIEE)  is  to
promote ethics in engineering practice  and  education.   One  component  of
NIEE  is  the  Applied  Ethics  in  Professional  Practice  (AEPP)  program,
providing free engineering  ethics  cases  for  educational  purposes.   The
following case may be reprinted if it is provided  free  of  charge  to  the
engineer or  student.   Written  permission  is  required  if  the  case  is
reprinted for resale.  For more cases and other NIEE  Products  &  Services,
contact  the  National  Institute  for  Engineering   Ethics,   Texas   Tech
University, www.niee.org..  (All reprints must contain these statements)

The Case:

Rashid is a freshly-minted engineer  from  City  Technical  Institute.   His
first job out of  college  is  with  the  general  construction  firm,  Rome
Builders Inc., located down state.  Rashid reports to work,  eager  to  step
into his new role.  He finds  out  that  his  boss,  Riley,  is  a  seasoned
contractor with a “tough but fair” reputation.

Riley wastes no time in giving Rashid an assignment.  Rashid is sent  to  an
office building construction site  to  monitor  subcontractor  work/activity
relative to evaluation of subcontractor progress  payment  requests.   Riley
is clear in his instructions: “On measurable tasks, count  quantities.   For
hourly personnel, your job is to count heads, keep time and make  sure  that
they are working continuously; that’s it.”  Riley goes on to complain  about
the necessity of keeping subcontractors on task: “You  have  to  watch  them
like a hawk,” he says.  Though Rashid feels as though he  is  being  treated
as an overqualified bean counter, he accepts the  assignment  and  heads  to
the work site.

As with many projects, this one has a well-defined timeline and everyone  is
under pressure to keep to the schedule.   While  the  City  of  Rome  wasn’t
built in a day, Rome Builders’ motto is that if they  had  been  around,  it
would have been.   In  fact,  this  particular  project  has  fallen  behind
schedule – a state of affairs that keeps Riley breathing fire.

One of the subcontractors that Rashid monitors is responsible  for  applying
a protective coating to the steel beams of the  new  structure.   Given  the
limitations specified by Riley – count heads and keep time  –  this  is  not
what Rashid would call challenging work.  He soon grows  bored  and  decides
to spend some of his time reviewing the project specifications in  order  to
become better informed about the construction process.  Having reviewed  the
specifications, it is not long before he notices a  potential  problem.   In
some instances, portions of the steel beams have been covered by  walls  and
are thus inaccessible for the coating procedure.  While Rashid is  reluctant
to delay progress, he is concerned about the potential oversight.

Some weeks pass as Rashid faithfully  monitors  the  project.   He  notices,
among other things, that the  coating  subcontractor  is  the  main  problem
child relative to the project schedule.  One reason for this is  that  Gibb,
the coating subcontractor superintendent, is  rarely  on  site.   When  Gibb
does show up, he spends most of his  time  regaling  his  workers  with  his
recent skeet shooting exploits.

One day, the building inspector,  Janis,  stops  by  for  a  scheduled  code
inspection.  Gibb,  Janis,  and  Rashid  walk  through  the  site,  chatting
amiably, as Janis checks for  code  compliance.   At  one  point,  Janis  is
focusing her attention on  one  of  the  beams  that  Rashid  took  note  of
earlier.  She notes that the beam is partially covered by a  wall  and  asks
Gibb if the covered portion has  also  been  coated  per  the  specs.   Gibb
responds that it has been and he takes the opportunity to discuss  the  high
premium he places on quality  and  thoroughness  with  his  workers.   Janis
moves on to the next point of inspection without  further  comment.   Rashid
suspects that Gibb is lying through his  teeth,  but  says  nothing  at  the
time.

The next day, before going to the site,  Rashid  stops  by  the  office  and
catches Riley heading to a meeting.  Rashid quickly  expresses  his  concern
about the beam coating and inspection  issue.   Riley  is  visibly  agitated
over the interruption in his day.  He reminds Rashid  that  the  project  is
behind  schedule  and  flatly  states  that  beam  coating  quality  is  the
subcontractor’s responsibility, and verification of quality is  between  the
subcontractor  and  the  inspector.   Riley  states:  “Gibb  has  years   of
experience and knows what works.  Your job is to keep on top of the  project
and not delay progress.”  With that, Riley  stalks  off  to  the  conference
room for his meeting.

Rashid is in a quandary.  On the one hand, he  is  reluctant  to  press  the
issue because he is a new and inexperienced employee.  On  the  other  hand,
Rashid cannot casually dismiss the coating  issue  and  is  concerned  about
quality, especially as it relates to public safety.
What should Rashid do?
Alternate Approaches and Survey Results for “Roman Holiday” (Case 1042
   1. Go along, get along.  Rashid  should  accept  Riley’s  assurances  and
      return to his project responsibilities without delay.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 0%

   2. Cover your backside.  Rashid should accept Riley’s assurances and  get
      on with the project, after first taking the time to carefully document
      his concerns about the entire situation in a detailed memo to file.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 7%

   3.  Use  the  opportunity  to  learn.    Since   Rashid   is   admittedly
      inexperienced in such matters, he should “quietly” do some homework on
      the internet  and  with  other  subcontractors  to  determine  how  to
      identify whether the beams have been adequately coated, and he  should
      go out to the site and make the appropriate inspection.  If  something
      is indeed amiss, Rashid should outline a recommended course of  action
      and notify Riley of his findings.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 15%

   4. Et tu, Rashid?  Realizing that Riley will allow nothing to  compromise
      the  project  schedule,  Rashid  should,  without  Riley’s  knowledge,
      approach Rome Builder’s vice president, Mr. Mac White, and  share  his
      concerns about the beam coating, and about Riley’s acquiescence in the
      matter.  Rashid should await further instruction while Mr. White deals
      with Riley.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 1%

   5. Comply with the code of ethics.  In the interest of the public  health
      and safety, Rashid should pursue  his  concerns  until  he  feels  the
      matter is satisfactorily addressed.  At the least, this would  consist
      of doing some homework and having a qualified independent third  party
      knowledgeable  of  the  code  requirements  –  perhaps  Janis  –  more
      carefully inspect the partially-covered beams.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 33%

   6. There are many ways to solve a problem.  Rashid should call  a  friend
      at the local newspaper and – with the agreement that he be  identified
      only  as  a  “reliable  source”  –  share  his  concerns  about   code
      compliance.  He knows that his newspaper friend will make  appropriate
      inquiry, and this will pressure Gibb  and  Riley  to  act  responsibly
      without Rashid having to get wrapped up in company politics.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 1%

   7. Implement company loss prevention training.   Rashid  should  approach
      Riley and again share his concerns about the beam  coating.   However,
      this time  he  should  suggest  a  game  plan  that  acknowledges  the
      liability of their company, such  as  requesting  that  Janis  provide
      written confirmation of the adequacy of the beam coating.   This  gets
      Rashid and Riley legally off the hook if any problem occurs.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 10%

   8. Run towards the roar.  Rashid should approach Riley  and  again  share
      his concerns about the beam coating.  Further, he should suggest  that
      both he and Riley visit Gibb to explain their concerns, as well as the
      ramifications of negligence and the fact that code specifications  are
      not open to interpretation.  This puts the issue  squarely  in  Gibb’s
      court – where it belongs.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 14%

   9. Go to the source.  Rashid should approach Riley and  again  share  his
      concerns about the beam coating.  Further, he should suggest that both
      he and Riley visit Janis and arrange for a meeting and  inspection  of
      the project to look into their concerns.   Perhaps  everything  is  to
      spec.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 14%

  10. Check it to them.  Rashid should  inform  Riley  that  he  refuses  to
      continue with the project, and he will  resign  from  the  company  if
      necessary.  While this will be costly to him, it is surely better than
      being around when “Rome” burns.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 4%

Forum Comments from Respondents

   1. Rashid cannot ignore this potential problem; public health and  safety
      and his company's liability are on the line.

   2. Rashid should  schedule  an  appointment  with  Riley  so  as  not  to
      "interrupt his day".  In a calmer setting, Riley might be more willing
      to listen to Rashid.

   3. Rashid should not back down at all.  Rashid  should  continue  to  put
      pressure on Riley because if something happens in the future  (because
      of safety), it will be Rashid's job and integrity on the line for  not
      voicing his opinion according to the ASCE Code of Ethics.

   4. Rashid should first take the opportunity to learn more; that is almost
      always a good place to start.  Once  better  informed,  Rashid  should
      discuss his concerns with Riley.  He and  Riley  should  then  take  a
      closer look with Janis and have Janis evaluate whether the  beams  are
      adequately coated.  If Janis cannot sign off on Gibb’s work, then  the
      group (Janis, Riley & Rashid) should go  to  Gibb  and  explain  their
      concerns.  The only acceptable  solution  is  that  the  beam  coating
      complies with the  project  specifications.   The  greatest  potential
      difficulty for Rashid would be if Riley will not  support  a  further,
      closer inspection.  Then Rashid would have to go above or around Riley
      to have his concerns addressed.  At the very least, Rashid should have
      Janis take a close look and ensure that the beams are properly coated.

   5. Rashid should approach Riley when he is not distracted  by  a  meeting
      and suggest they discuss the situation with Gibbs.  If this  does  not
      correct the issue, Rashid should pursue the matter until  his  concern
      is satisfactorily addressed.

   6. Rashid should go to Riley a second time.  Riley is the key  person  to
      address this situation and Rashid should see to  it  that  he  gets  a
      clear picture of the facts.  Most of the other  solutions  are  either
      too aggressive or lack ethical value.

