

                           The Second Time Around

                                 (Case 1022)


The mission of the National Institute for Engineering Ethics  (NIEE)  is  to
promote ethics in engineering practice  and  education.   One  component  of
NIEE  is  the  Applied  Ethics  in  Professional  Practice  (AEPP)  program,
providing free engineering  ethics  cases  for  educational  purposes.   The
following case may be reprinted if it is provided  free  of  charge  to  the
engineer or  student.   Written  permission  is  required  if  the  case  is
reprinted for resale.  For more cases and other NIEE  Products  &  Services,
contact  the  National  Institute  for  Engineering   Ethics,   Texas   Tech
University, www.niee.org..  (All reprints must contain these statements)

The Case:
You are a design engineer for an old-line consulting firm in a  medium-sized
city in the Southwest, and have been with the firm for several  years.   One
of the firm’s specialties is assisting contractors with the  development  of
construction methods, and designing falsework, formwork and  steel  erection
systems for various projects after the contract  has  been  awarded  to  the
contractor, or during the contract bidding period to aid the  contractor  in
developing  construction  method  concepts  and  associated  costs  for  bid
purposes.

A few years ago, you were retained by Hartwell Construction  Co.  to  assist
them in developing a unique and cost-effective  engineering  solution  to  a
difficult heavy construction problem.  The solution you devised worked  very
well during  construction,  and  Hartwell  Construction  made  an  excellent
profit on the project.  Your firm was paid a fee of $25,000  based  on  your
time and materials costs, in accordance with your agreement with Hartwell.

Currently, a very similar project  is  out  for  bids  in  the  local  area.
Zeller Construction Inc., a company for whom you have not worked before,  is
aware of the work you did for Hartwell and would like to have you help  them
with a solution to a construction problem virtually  identical  to  the  one
you worked on previously for Hartwell.  In fact, Zeller says  the  situation
is so similar that you could simply change  the  title  block  on  your  old
drawings to fit the new project.

You hear through the grapevine that Hartwell Construction is  also  planning
to bid on the project, but they have not contacted you for  your  assistance
so far.

Question 1:
If you accept the assignment from Zeller, how do you decide  what  your  fee
should be?

Question 2:
If you are contacted by Hartwell  to  participate  with  them,  how  do  you
decide what the fee should be?

Question 3:
Does your decision change if you find out that Hartwell has decided  not  to
bid on the project?


Alternate Approaches and Survey Results for “The Second Time  Around”  (Case
1022)


Question 1:

1.    Since the construction problem is virtually identical to the  one  you
    solved for Hartwell, change the title block on the drawings to  reflect
    the new project, as Zeller suggested, send them to  Zeller  and  charge
    them a lump sum fee of $10,000.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  2%

2.    Since the construction problem is virtually identical to the  one  you
    solved for Hartwell, change the title block on the drawings to  reflect
    the new project, as Zeller suggested, send them to  Zeller  and  charge
    them a lump sum fee of $15,000.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  2%

3.    Since the construction problem is virtually identical to the  one  you
    solved for Hartwell, change the title block on the drawings to  reflect
    the new project, as Zeller suggested, send them to  Zeller  and  charge
    them a lump sum fee of $25,000.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 19%

4.    While no construction problem is identical to  one  encountered  on  a
    different project, you put enough effort  into  the  original  solution
    that there can’t be a whole lot of additional effort involved  in  this
    assignment.  Tell Zeller you will work for them for a  lump  sum  price
    (which includes your best estimate of the additional time involved  for
    this project plus a fixed figure for use of the methods  developed  for
    the original project) of $15,000.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 20%

5.    No construction problem is actually identical to that  encountered  on
    a different project.  Offer to review your original calculations  based
    on the details of the new project and provide job-specific drawings and
    calculations to Zeller  for  a  fee  based  on  the  time  involved  in
    adjusting/updating the drawings and calculations.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 57%

Question 2:
6.    Since the construction problem is virtually identical to the  one  you
    solved before for Hartwell, change the title block on the  drawings  to
    reflect the new project, send them to Hartwell and charge them  a  lump
    sum fee of $10,000.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  4%

7.    Since the construction problem is virtually identical to the  one  you
    solved before for Hartwell, change the title block on the  drawings  to
    reflect the new project, send them to Hartwell and charge them  a  lump
    sum fee of $15,000.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  3%

8.    Since the construction problem is virtually identical to the  one  you
    solved before for Hartwell, change the title block on the  drawings  to
    reflect the new project, send them to Hartwell and charge them  a  lump
    sum fee of $25,000.  Percentage of votes agreeing: 11%

9.    While no construction problem is identical to  one  encountered  on  a
    different project, you put enough effort  into  the  original  solution
    that there can’t be a whole lot of additional effort involved  in  this
    assignment.  Tell Hartwell you will work for them for a lump sum  price
    (which includes your best estimate of the additional time involved  for
    this project plus a fixed figure for use of the methods  developed  for
    the original project) of $15,000.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 22%

10.   No construction problem is actually identical to that  encountered  on
    a different project.    Offer  to  review  your  original  calculations
    based on the details  of  the  new  project  and  provide  job-specific
    drawings and calculations to Hartwell for  a  fee  based  on  the  time
    involved in adjusting/updating the drawings and calculations.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 60%

Question 3:
11.   Yes, if you have decided to charge a lump sum to Zeller, increase  it.


      Percentage of votes agreeing: 11%

12.   No, stay  with  your  decision  for  your  work  with  Zeller  as  you
    indicated under Question 1, above.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 89%


Forum Comments from Respondents

1.    First come, first served in business.  I  am  a  contracted  employee,
    and nothing is ever the same, especially when it comes to dealing  with
    construction.

2.    For Question 1: Zeller is looking for the cheap engineering  solution.
     From past history, most situations in the engineering and construction
    arena are not “so similar”.  Maybe your quote (budget estimate?) should
    be on a T&M (Time and Materials) basis.  If the project is  similar  to
    the previous one, the engineering fee should end  up  being  less.   If
    not, you are compensated fairly for the design.   Under  no  conditions
    should Lump Sum be considered until you  fully  understand  the  entire
    scope of the project.  Varying loads and how  they  are  applied  could
    result in a completely new design.  New details  may  be  required  and
    take time to develop.

3.    For Question 2:  You  could  give  Hartwell  the  same  quote  (budget
    estimate?) given to Zeller.  At this point the contractors are  looking
    at you as a subcontractor who has no allegiance to either of  them  and
    quoting both should not be considered unethical provided the  same  fee
    arrangements are quoted to both.  You are not  working  for  either  of
    them yet and there is no other firm quoting fees to  provide  the  same
    services.  Nonetheless, this approach might  backfire  because  one  or
    both of them might not think of you as a “team  player”.   Either  way,
    the quote to Zeller should not change if Hartwell decides  not  to  bid
    the project.

4.    You should consider applying for a US and an international patent  for
    the original design you developed for Hartwell and offer  to  make  the
    design available to Zeller at a fee you expect will cover the costs  of
    applying for and acquiring the patents.

5.    Additional information about the original contract between  your  firm
    and Hartwell would be helpful.  If Hartwell retained ownership  of  the
    design as part of your contract with  them,  then  you  should  decline
    working for Zeller Construction.  On  the  other  hand,  if  your  firm
    retained ownership of the original documents,  then  you  are  free  to
    enter into an agreement with Zeller, since the obligation  to  Hartwell
    was fulfilled on the first project.  As a matter of courtesy,  however,
    you should notify Hartwell that you are planning to be a  subconsultant
    to Zeller.

6.    The fee charge Zeller should be based on the  value  of  the  services
    you will be providing, and not on a time and materials basis.  The  fee
    should be in the range of the fee charged to Hartwell for the  original
    work.


