
         An Interesting Confliction: What’s Love Got to Do with It?
                                 (Case 1037)

The mission of the National Institute for Engineering Ethics  (NIEE)  is  to
promote ethics in engineering practice  and  education.   One  component  of
NIEE  is  the  Applied  Ethics  in  Professional  Practice  (AEPP)  program,
providing free engineering  ethics  cases  for  educational  purposes.   The
following case may be reprinted if it is provided  free  of  charge  to  the
engineer or  student.   Written  permission  is  required  if  the  case  is
reprinted for resale.  For more cases and other NIEE  Products  &  Services,
contact  the  National  Institute  for  Engineering   Ethics,   Texas   Tech
University, www.niee.org..  (All reprints must contain these statements)



The Case:
Fulton  Adams,  legal  counsel  for  the  insurance  company  which  insures
Wastewater Treatment Systems, Inc. (the defendant), has  retained  you,  Joe
Friday, P.E., as an engineering consultant in a  lawsuit  filed  by  Kinkora
Developments (the plaintiff).  Your responsibility is to analyze the  claims
made by Kinkora Developments concerning the alleged failure  of  the  sludge
treatment facility at a sewage treatment plant for a very large  residential
community.  The treatment system was designed and constructed by  Wastewater
Treatment, and operated by Kinkora Developments.  It is understood  that  in
addition to providing technical consultation regarding the sludge  treatment
system and possible reasons  for  the  alleged  failure,  you  may  also  be
requested to appear  in  court  as  an  expert  witness  on  behalf  of  the
defendant.
You indicate to Mr.  Adams  that  you  will  review  all  of  the  available
information, make a site visit, and advise him as  to  whether  you  believe
the plaintiff  has  a  reasonable  complaint,  or  whether  there  is  other
evidence to explain the failure of the sludge treatment process.   With  his
approval,  and  the  concurrence  of  Wastewater  Treatment,  you  spend   a
considerable  amount  of  time   reviewing   the   design   parameters   and
construction of the facility, including two  days  of  observations  at  the
plant.
On the basis of your work, you  advise  Adams  that  you  believe  there  is
reasonable doubt that the system failure is due to the  design,  but  rather
it appears that Kinkora Developments had no previous experience operating  a
sewage  treatment  plant.   Furthermore,  Kinkora  had  hired  a  number  of
inexperienced treatment plant  operators  who  systematically  neglected  to
maintain the equipment in accordance with the recommendations  made  in  the
Operations  and  Maintenance  (O&M)  Manual  prepared  for  the   plant   by
Wastewater Treatment Systems.
Despite  the  presentation  of  this  evidence  in  depositions  during  the
discovery process, the plaintiff, represented  by  Ms.  Amanda  Cuthbert  of
Xernon, Young and Zimmer, is considering taking the  claim  to  court.   You
are soon informed that Clyde Cleghorn, P.E., an engineer with  one  of  your
competitors, has been retained by Kinkora Developments as their  engineering
consultant and expert witness.  You have run  into  Cleghorn  from  time  to
time at various  engineering  society  meetings,  and  understand  that  his
experience has been primarily dealing with small,  on-site  sewage  disposal
systems for single family lots.  Other than that,  you  have  little  first-
hand knowledge of his capabilities.
During Mr. Cleghorn’s deposition (to which you are invited by  Fulton  Adams
as an observer), Cleghorn makes a variety of statements  which  reveal  that
he  has  little  understanding  of  sludge  treatment  systems   design   or
operations.  During the occasional breaks  in  the  deposition  proceedings,
you casually notice that Cleghorn tends to be  quite  solicitous  of  Amanda
Cuthbert, the plaintiff’s attorney, more so  than  you  would  expect  in  a
client/consultant relationship.
Reviewing the statements and analyses made by  Cleghorn,  you  are  all  the
more convinced that he has  missed  the  mark  completely  and  that  shoddy
maintenance was the cause of the failure.  You inform Fulton Adams  of  your
reinforced opinion, and he in turn indicates that the insurance company  for
Kinkora has refused to provide any  further  financial  support  for  Amanda
Cuthbert.  Nonetheless, the president of Kinkora  insists  on  pursuing  the
matter in court, and there is conjecture that Amanda has agreed to  continue
with the case on a contingency  basis;  that  is,  she  and  her  firm  will
receive  approximately  40%  or  more  of  the  award  if  the  court  finds
Wastewater Treatment Systems at fault.
Dates for the trial are arranged by the  court,  starting  in  approximately
six weeks.  In the interim, you attend an engineering society conference  at
a resort some 400 miles  from  your  city.   Looking  through  the  list  of
attendees, you note that most of the engineers have brought  their  spouses,
and the attendance roster lists them as in the following example:
               ▪ Robert and Mary Jones

               ▪ Cynthia and Delbert Ryley
Further down the roster you see, and are rather surprised by, the  following
entry:
               ▪ Clyde Cleghorn and Amanda Cuthbert

The following evening, it so  happens  that,  while  visiting  one  of  your
friends in another wing of  the  conference  hotel,  you  notice  Clyde  and
Amanda entering a room together.  Keeping this in mind, after you return  to
your city, you make some discreet inquiries and  find  out  that  Clyde  has
been separated from his wife for several months, and  that  Amanda  Cuthbert
has been divorced for three years.  In addition, one  of  the  engineers  in
Clyde’s office verifies that Clyde moved in with Amanda about the  time  the
Kinkora case started and they have been living together since then.
What, if anything, do you do?

Alternate Approaches and Survey Results  for  “An  Interesting  Confliction:
What’s Love Got to Do with It?” (Case 1037)

   1. Narrow your focus.  Stick  to  doing  your  best  job  on  engineering
      matters and don’t involve  yourself  in  politics,  personalities,  or
      other matters.  Give your expert opinion on the technical  matters  at
      hand only.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 16%
   2. Believe the best.   You  probably  violated  some  right  of  personal
      privacy when you inquired about Cleghorn and Cuthbert’s  relationship.
      Also, how do you know if the information that one of the engineers  in
      Cleghorn’s office told you is true?  And even if Cleghorn and Cuthbert
      are lovers, despite their personal relationship, Cleghorn could  still
      be behaving as an unbiased professional with regard  to  the  lawsuit.


      Percentage of votes agreeing: 6%
   3. Don’t cast stones.  The recent emphasis in government,  business,  and
      the press on corporate misconduct  and  presumed  lack  of  integrity,
      especially regarding professionals, is demeaning  and  denigrating  to
      the profession.  The world doesn’t  need  another  scandal.   Besides,
      people –engineers in particular – are inherently good, and left alone,
      they will make moral, ethical decisions and  behave  accordingly.   By
      saying something, you would be suggesting that Cleghorn is not  acting
      in an ethical manner.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 0%
   4. Keep it professional.  Although the relationship between Cleghorn  and
      Cuthbert may be against your religious  and  moral  principles,  their
      personal morality is not at issue  in  this  situation.   Rather,  the
      question is whether they are working together to enrich themselves  by
      means of Amanda Cuthbert’s contingency arrangement with the plaintiff.
       Your strategy should be to delve into Cleghorn’s technical background
      to find weaknesses that can be  exploited  during  trial  and  try  to
      discredit him as an expert witness.   Put  aside  the  personal  moral
      issues for the time being.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 19%
   5. Be a friend.  Call Cleghorn on the telephone at home and inform him of
      your observations, mentioning both the convention roster  as  well  as
      “confidential information” given to  you  by  unnamed,  but  otherwise
      reliable, sources in the local engineering community.  In  a  friendly
      way, point out that if he and Cuthbert are romantically involved, such
      a relationship might raise questions about  Cleghorn’s  motivation  in
      his testimony and this could be used against him to the  detriment  of
      his client.  Suggest that the prudent thing is for Cleghorn to  excuse
      himself as an expert witness in the case before it gets to court.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 11%
   6. Call your lawyer.  Inform Fulton Adams (your client) of what you  have
      discovered, and the sources of the information.  Suggest that this may
      well be a conflict of interest and a violation of  the  NSPE  Code  of
      Ethics for Engineers under the  Rules  of  Practice  and  Professional
      Obligations.  Recommend that he (Fulton Adams) look into the matter.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 23%
   7. Play to win.  Inform Fulton Adams  (your  client)  of  what  you  have
      discovered  about  Cleghorn,  and  the  sources  of  the  information.
      Suggest that this may well be a conflict of interest and  a  violation
      of the NSPE Code of Ethics for Engineers under the Rules  of  Practice
      and Professional Obligations.  If so, then Cleghorn’s  credibility  as
      an unbiased engineering expert might be  seriously  in  question,  and
      this is a wonderful opportunity to get rid of him as a witness for the
      plaintiff, Kinkora,  thereby  providing  excellent  leverage  for  the
      defendant, Wastewater Treatment Systems to win the case.   (You  never
      did like Cleghorn, anyway).
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 3%
   8. Really play to win.  Inform Fulton Adams (your  client)  of  what  you
      have discovered about Cleghorn, and the sources  of  the  information.
      Acknowledge  that  although  Cleghorn’s  credibility  as  an  unbiased
      engineering expert might be seriously in question,  suggest  to  Adams
      that he set aside the ethics of the matter and  focus  on  the  bigger
      picture.  You really don’t want Cleghorn to be excluded from the case,
      because you know you can show that Cleghorn  doesn’t  know  what  he’s
      talking about. If Kinkora has to replace Cleghorn (assuming they  have
      the chance), they might get someone who knows something, or is willing
      to testify to whatever they want. Better to stay with “the  devil  you
      know.”
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 8%
   9. File a complaint against Cleghorn.  Compile the information  you  have
      and file a complaint  against  Cleghorn  with  the  state’s  Board  of
      Registration for  Professional  Engineers.   This  type  of  thing  is
      demeaning  to  the  engineering  profession  and  should  be  stopped.
      Getting Cleghorn’s license suspended or revoked is the best way to  do
      it.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 6%
  10. File a complaint against Cuthbert.  You have a  deep  abiding  passion
      for the legal system, and it seems plain enough to you that Cuthbert’s
      behavior is out of line.  Her affections have clouded her judgment and
      led her to hire her unqualified lover to be her expert. You know  that
      Cuthbert’s colleagues would  be  outraged  at  her  behavior  and  its
      potential affect on the reputation of their 100+  yr.  old  firm.  You
      should send the managing partner of Cuthbert’s firm a letter detailing
      Cuthbert’s conduct and expressing how it  would  look  if  brought  to
      public attention.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 2%
Forum Comments from Respondents
   1. A combination of alternative 5 (be a friend) and  alterative  6  (call
      the lawyer) is appropriate for this case.

   2. Is it ethical to invade on personal business? It may be best  to  call
      the engineer, inform him of the information you have  seen,  and  tell
      him that you will not use this information to discredit him in  court.
      But you could  suggest  that  he  consider  stepping  down  as  expert
      witness, because of the potential bad that could come of it.

   3. Option 6 is the preferred choice.  Then assuming Cleghorn and Cuthbert
      are outside the acceptable boundaries of the NSPE code of  ethics,  it
      would be appropriate to choose to act as a friend (5) and inform them.
       There is no point in discrediting a colleague whose qualifications we
      are unsure of.  Hopefully the case  will  be  resolved  to  Wastewater
      Treatment's satisfaction in court.

Comments from Board of Review Members
   1. This case presents an interesting situation calling more  for  dealing
      with  Cleghorn's  competency  and  credibility   than   his   personal
      relations.  If he were competent to testify, would  it  really  matter
      whether he was sleeping with the attorney who puts him up as an expert
      witness?  Similarly, if he is not competent, shouldn't the protagonist
      focus his efforts on exposing Cleghorn's unsuitability as an expert?

   2. Option No. 9 is the appropriate course of action, since  there  appear
      to  be  enough  issues  to  warrant  a  complaint  to  the  Board   of
      Registration for Professional Engineers. A complaint before the  Board
      would allow Clyde Cleghorn, P.E. to respond  to  the  allegations  and
      give him the opportunity to present his side.
      It is interesting to note that this case makes explicit  reference  to
      the NSPE Code  of  Ethics  for  Engineers.   With  that  in  mind,  in
      reviewing the NSPE Code of Ethics,  it  would  be  helpful  for  Clyde
      Cleghorn,  P.E.  to  address  Code  Section  I.5  (Engineers,  in  the
      fulfillment of their professional duties, shall…avoid deceptive acts),
      Code Section I.6 (Engineers, in the fulfillment of their  professional
      duties, shall… conduct themselves honorably,  responsibly,  ethically,
      and lawfully so as to enhance the honor, reputation, and usefulness of
      the profession), Code Section III.5 (Engineers shall not be influenced
      in their professional  duties  by  conflicting  interests),  and  Code
      Section III. 6.a (Engineers shall not request, propose,  or  accept  a
      commission on a contingent basis under circumstances  in  which  their
      judgment may be compromised).  In relation to the facts of this  case,
      these provisions of the NSPE Code of Ethics present  enough  potential
      violations for the complaint.

   3.  This  is  a  good  case  for  introspection  regarding  our  role  as
      professionals. I think we should add another Alternative Approach:

           x.    Re-examine the assignment (as spelled  out  in  the  first
           paragraph): ...to analyze the claims made  ......concerning  the
           alleged failure of the sludge treatment  facility,  and  provide
           technical consultation regarding the sludge treament system  and
           possible reasons for the alleged failure .... and, if requested,
           appear in court as an expert witness. These are the professional
           services Joe Friday has been retained to provide.

      Remember that, as a professional, we have an obligation to respect the
      privacy  of  others  and  the  stature  of  our  profession.  Offering
      gratuitous  comments  or  statements  outside   the   scope   of   our
      professional engagement would be unprofessional.

   4. Adjudicating the morals of another engineer is  beyond  the  scope  of
      enforcing the Code of Ethics. The difficulty in this case  is  proving
      Cleghorn's intent, i.e., does he stand to benefit from  the  testimony
      by getting a part of the contingency fee that Amanda would receive  if
      she wins the case? The conflict of interest has to be proven  and  all
      that is available now is conjecture. The engineer should inform Fulton
      Adams of the situation and leave it up to him to pursue  the  conflict
      of interest issue. The engineer (Joe Friday)  should  concentrate  his
      efforts on building a case to discredit Cleghorn as an expert  witness
      based on his experience and background and the lack of  experience  in
      the type of problem involved in this case.

