
                           An Unsettling Situation
                                 (Case 1015)

The mission of the National Institute for Engineering Ethics  (NIEE)  is  to
promote ethics in engineering practice  and  education.   One  component  of
NIEE  is  the  Applied  Ethics  in  Professional  Practice  (AEPP)  program,
providing free engineering  ethics  cases  for  educational  purposes.   The
following case may be reprinted if it is provided  free  of  charge  to  the
engineer or  student.   Written  permission  is  required  if  the  case  is
reprinted for resale.  For more cases and other NIEE  Products  &  Services,
contact  the  National  Institute  for  Engineering   Ethics,   Texas   Tech
University, www.niee.org..  (All reprints must contain these statements)

The Case:
Your company is  hired  by  a  design-build  team  to  provide  geotechnical
engineering services for the development of a  complex  of  five,  two-story
office structures on an undeveloped, wooded  site.   The  design-build  team
consists of a  large  contractor  and  a  multi-disciplinary  architectural-
engineering  (A/E)  design   firm.    Neither   the   contractor   nor   the
architect/engineer firm will retain any financial interest  in  the  project
once it is completed and purchased by one of several prospective buyers.

You  are  the  geotechnical   engineer   in   charge   of   the   subsurface
investigation, testing,  engineering  analysis,  and  site  preparation  and
foundation design recommendations.  Because of the  moderately  compressible
nature of the subsoils at the site, your recommendation is  to  support  the
structures on piles to avoid long-term  settlements  that  would  not  cause
collapse of the structures, but would lead to cracking of floor slabs,  some
differential  movement  of  the  second  stories  and   potential   distress
(cracking) to the brick masonry and glass exteriors of the buildings.

When advised of your recommendations by telephone,  the  contractor  on  the
design-build team reviews the local building code  and  questions  why  they
can’t support the buildings on  shallow  spread  footings  designed  on  the
basis of the allowable soil bearing pressures indicated in that code.

When you tell the contractor that  excessive  settlements  will  occur  over
time, the contractor questions if settlements will be excessive  during  the
first year after completion of construction,  which  is  also  the  warranty
period for the project.  Your analyses indicate that the settlements in  the
first year will not be excessive, rather  the  problems  due  to  settlement
will not manifest themselves until several years have elapsed.

The contractor requests that you  write  your  report  recommending  shallow
footing foundations designed in accordance  with  the  local  building  code
requirements, since he maintains that the design-build team obligation  only
extends to the first year following completion of construction.  There is  a
clear implication that you may not get paid for your services if you do  not
comply with the contractor’s request.

What do you do?

Alternate Approaches and Survey Results for “An Unsettling Situation”  (Case
1015)
1.    Do as the contractor asks.  Even though your analyses  show  that  the
    buildings will settle differentially over time creating cracks  in  the
    walls and floors, all buildings experience  cracking.   They  will  not
    collapse nor cause a threat to the safety and welfare of the  occupants
    or the public.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  0%

2.    Do as the contractor asks.  It is his money that  is  paying  for  the
    project and for your consulting fees as well.  If you don't, it appears
    that the contractor may not pay you for your work.   As  long  as  your
    recommendations do not violate the local building code (even though the
    buildings will experience long-term differential settlements), you have
    met your obligations as a professional engineer.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  1%

3.    Do as the contractor asks, and submit your report recommending  spread
    footings instead of piles.  However, send  a  separate  letter  to  him
    indicating that you originally  recommended  piles  instead  of  spread
    footings to avoid the predicted long-term differential settlements  and
    potential floor and wall cracking,  and  that  at  his  insistence  the
    recommendations were changed to spread footings.  This will protect you
    legally should anything happen in the future.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  5%

4.    Do as the contractor asks, but file a  memo  with  the  city  building
    department indicating that even though the spread  footing  foundations
    recommended in your geotechnical report meet the letter of the building
    code, it is anticipated that long-term settlements will occur and  that
    cracking of floors, walls and large windows over time may result.  This
    way if prospective buyers ask to see the city's  permit  file  for  the
    building, they will be apprised of the potential  settlements  and  the
    effects on the structures.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  7%

5.    Do as the contractor asks, but indicate  in  your  final  report  that
    while the use of spread footings will comply with  the  local  building
    code with respect to bearing capacity protection against sudden failure
    and vertical penetration of  the  foundations  and  supported  columns,
    there is the real  potential  of  differential  settlement  with  time,
    resulting in distress in the form of cracking in the floors and  walls.
    Then indicate  that  in  order  to  negate  the  effects  of  long-term
    settlements, use of piles for support of the buildings is  recommended.


      Percentage of votes agreeing:  14%

6.    Tell the contractor you can do as he asks only if he will provide  you
    and your company with a  defend  and  hold  harmless  agreement  (which
    includes the cost of legal defense) should future owners of the  office
    complex bring a law suit against you or your company,  either  directly
    or as a third party defendant, as a result of the  predicted  wall  and
    floor cracking due to long-term differential settlements.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  4%

7.    It may be that the contractor is trying to look good in  the  eyes  of
    the rest of the design-build team.  Find out  who  the  prime  decision
    maker is among the design-build  team  (is  it  the  A/E  firm  or  the
    contractor?).  If it is not the contractor, call a meeting with the A/E
    firm, inviting the contractor as well, to discuss the results  of  your
    geotechnical explorations, analyses and design recommendations.  In the
    meeting,  stress  that  professionally  you  cannot  do  analyses  that
    indicate one type of  foundation  (piles)  as  most  suitable  for  the
    proposed buildings,  then  write  a  report  recommending  an  inferior
    foundation system (spread footings in this case).  As a result, you are
    sticking to your original recommendations in your report.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  25%

8.     Tell  the  contractor  you  cannot  do  ask  he  asks.   You  have  a
    professional responsibility to report  the  results  of  your  analyses
    fairly and accurately, even if the cost incurred by installing the pile
    foundations are greater than the spread footings.  You do not  want  to
    be a party to  recommending  a  foundation  system  which  will  induce
    anticipated distress in the building at some later date.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  33%

9.    This happens all the time.  You do your best to  provide  professional
    recommendations to your clients in accordance with  good  standards  of
    practice, and they keep coming back looking for cheaper solutions, even
    if the total integrity of the structure is compromised to some  degree.
    Tell him that you not only will not comply with his request,  you  will
    be happy to give your entire file to the city building  department  and
    suggest that they refuse to grant him building permits for any projects
    within the city limits in the future should he refuse to pay your fees.


      Percentage of votes agreeing:  5%

10.   Tell the contractor that you will consider his request, but  you  must
    wait for a few days for some additional information  before  finalizing
    your report.  Then contact the lending institution (local bank) that is
    providing the funding for the construction of the project  and  discuss
    the situation with them.  Since both the bank and your firm intends  to
    continue to do business in the city for a long time to  come,  and  the
    contractor and his team may not  be  around  if  they  continue  to  do
    business in this manner, you want to be on the side of the  bank.   You
    agree  with  the  bank  to  include   recommendations   for   whichever
    foundations they feel appropriate in your  final  report,  whether  the
    contractor agrees or not.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  5%

11.   Mention the situation to your wife's cousin, who  is  a  reporter  for
    the local newspaper.  Suggest that an article indicating that  "usually
    reliable sources" have determined that the design-build team consisting
    of the A/E firm and the contractor are seeking  to  skimp  as  much  as
    possible on the foundations for this new office complex, and that  this
    may be a sign that other  portions  of  the  project  could  be  poorly
    designed as well, since the designers and contractor are  all  in  this
    project together to make as much money as possible.  Have him call  for
    an independent geotechnical analysis for  the  project  to  verify  the
    allegations made by the "usually reliable source."  In  this  way  your
    original analyses will be confirmed, and the contractor will be  unable
    to insist on changing your foundation design recommendations.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  1%


Forum Comments from Respondents
1.    Call a one-on-one informal meeting with the  contractor.   In  person,
    it will be easier to impress upon him the need to  use  piles...instead
    of shallow footings.  The time between when the meeting is  called  and
    when it actually occurs is the time you have to  'crunch  the  numbers'
    and somehow make this situation look good from the  contractor's  point
    of view.  Show him how his reputation has been built over the years and
    how it will be tarnished by a mediocre building.  Find out exactly  how
    much more the piles will cost and find a  way  to  make  it  worth  his
    while.

2.    I am sure there is probably  plenty  of  business  out  there  without
    having to work with people like this.  I believe  most  people  with  a
    conscience could not sleep at  night  knowing  that  they  approved  of
    something like this.  I would also think to myself that I  should  have
    bugged the phones to get this all on tape.

3.    I should make sure the contract for our services  defines  our  duties
    as an impartial consultant.  Explain to the contractor that this is the
    only way my company can do  business.   My  ability  to  provide  these
    services relies solely on our honest professional opinion.

4.    Any time the engineer does as  the  contractor  asks,  he  or  she  is
    neglecting the duty of care owed to  the  owner  or  occupants  of  the
    building at any point in time.  Therefore, doing as the contractor asks
    is out of the question.

5.    Being bound by Honor, even rigidly and strictly so, is, in  my  humble
    opinion, not a bad thing.

6.    "Think about the  public  or  civilians  who  may  be  killed  if  the
    building collapse.  Someday your wife or some relative may be  the  one
    getting killed.  Is not the  money.   We  choose  the  career  we  want
    because it is exiting and  bring us joy of helping other people.   Tell
    the constructor that you will talk with the rest of the company to come
    with a desition". [sic]

7.     "The  constructor  should  not  be  pressuring  the  engineer  to  do
    something that will contribute to a bigger problem and many  deads  may
    be safe in the future".  [sic]

8.    As an engineer, your reputation is built on the quality of your  work.
     When …damage occurs, laymen and engineers  alike  will  attribute  you
    competence to this project.

9.    Advise the contractor about statue of limitations that go beyond [one-
    year] guarantees.  Recommend that the contractor  consult  their  legal
    counsel on the matter.  Get paid!

10.   Ask the contractor if he has a good attorney who will help him with  a
    lawsuit in a few years.

11.   Find out for sure what  the  implied  threat  of  withholding  payment
    really meant.  This has to be worked out before the engineer  goes  any
    further on the project.

12.   In this situation losing the fee is a far far better thing to do  than
    supporting a crummy design that will lead to real problems later on.

13.   Redo the settlement calculations looking at the probable range of  the
    coefficient of consolidation.  It is a rare case that one  can  compute
    the time rate of settlement accurately.  And  even  then  most  of  the
    worst settlement usually happens in the first year  anyway.   Tell  the
    contractor that while it can't be said for  sure  when  the  settlement
    will occur, it usually happens faster than  the  calculations  indicate
    and this means there is a 95% probability there will be problems within
    the first year after construction.  Putting it probabilistically  gives
    the contractor the best idea of what the chances of a problem are.

14.   Tell the contractor to blow it out his ear!  1) What he is  asking  is
    for your complicity in  a  fraud.   2)The  statue  of  limitations  for
    criminal  conspiracy  is  longer  than  one  year.   3)The  statute  of
    limitations for  professional  misconduct  is  longer  than  one  year.
    4)Your  Errors  and  Omissions  insurance  will  not  cover  deliberate
    misconduct.  5)You will lose your license.

