
                       Plains, Prairies, And Porsches
                                 (Case 1032)


The mission of the National Institute for Engineering Ethics  (NIEE)  is  to
promote ethics in engineering practice  and  education.   One  component  of
NIEE  is  the  Applied  Ethics  in  Professional  Practice  (AEPP)  program,
providing free engineering  ethics  cases  for  educational  purposes.   The
following case may be reprinted if it is provided  free  of  charge  to  the
engineer or  student.   Written  permission  is  required  if  the  case  is
reprinted for resale.  For more cases and other NIEE  Products  &  Services,
contact  the  National  Institute  for  Engineering   Ethics,   Texas   Tech
University, www.niee.org..  (All reprints must contain these statements)

The Case:
Topher Green, the City Engineer of Plebian, Kansas, has found himself  in  a
serious predicament.  In  eighteen  years  of  service  to  Plebian,  Topher
cannot remember ever being so concerned about the welfare of his  community.
 The townspeople  are  his  family,  his  lifelong  friends  and  his  chief
concern, and they have always  trusted  Topher  to  make  the  wisest,  most
sensible decisions on behalf of the community.  This faith in his  abilities
is what Topher is the most apprehensive about with regards  to  his  current
situation.

In 1979, the year that Topher graduated with  his  engineering  degree  from
Kansas State University, Jim Barton, a Plebian farmer,  resident,  and  city
council member, opened his first retail outlet store, “Bar-Low’s.” His  sole
intent was to provide consumers with what he  valued  most:  low  prices,  a
family-friendly atmosphere, and southern hospitality.  Because  of  Barton’s
priority of satisfying his customers  efficiently  and  economically,  “Bar-
Low’s” has grown to become the largest retail chain in the world.

But this growth has caused stress in Plebian.  Due  to  increasing  interest
in the investments of the chain, national  manufacturers  are  beginning  to
move their businesses to where their money is—Plebian,  KA.   Culture  shock
has already emerged as businesses and their employees relocate to the  small
community.

Topher is aware of the discomfort  that  the  “outsiders”  are  causing  the
town’s residents.  In fact, one member of the Plebian  community  last  week
wrote a letter to the editor of the  local  newspaper  and  complained  that
“these big ol’ trucks just keep movin’ people into town like cattle. .  .  I
do believe I saw a feller with purple hair and a bolt through his nose  move
in next door to  me  Mondee.”    The  media  is  having  a  field  day,  and
reporters like to refer to this strange  mix  as  “urban  chic  meets  rural
limbo.”

But Topher is beginning  to  realize  that  “progress”  could  result  in  a
divisive fight for  the  heart  and  values  of  Plebian.   Development  has
created physical, cultural and economic barriers between old-time  residents
and newcomers.   Special interests have begun to polarize  City  opinion  on
this matter, some arguing that Jim  Barton  would  never  have  wanted  such
growth if it meant running over  the  “little  guy,”  and  others  embracing
growth as the sure means of a better life for all.

It all comes down to land.  Vast acres of land have already been  bought  up
by investors in order to facilitate the new businesses and  their  employees
daily  arriving  in  Plebian.  Cappuccino  shops,  golf   courses,   housing
editions, restaurants, hotels, and shopping centers have  been  built,  with
more in the developmental  stages,  and  the  plan  is  that  they  will  be
constructed as quickly as possible in order to facilitate the (wealthy)  new
arrivals with their penchant for the finer things of life.

In fact, the City just received a preliminary  application  for  development
of  “Windsor  Ridge”,  an  upscale,  gated  community  east  of   town   and
encompassing several hundred acres of prime  Plebian  countryside.    Topher
is quite familiar with the site, since he and his  boyhood  friends  fished,
hunted, and explored this area when he was growing up.  In his  professional
role as  City  Engineer,  Topher  now  must  approve  this  application  for
compliance with City codes and regulations.

Because of his personal knowledge  of  the  Windsor  Ridge  property,  while
looking over the drawings, Topher notices that Windsor Ridge  may  adversely
affect  several  of  Plebian’s  poorer  families  who  live  south  of   the
development.  These residents are descendants of settlers  who  arrived  145
years ago, and like family farmers everywhere, they have struggled  to  make
it.  Six generations are buried in the little cemetery lying behind the one-
room Primitive Baptist Church.  It  is  here  that  development  of  Windsor
Ridge will likely cause secondary impacts, that is, an increase  in  vehicle
traffic and modified drainage patterns on the property.

However, the design engineers have done a thorough  job,  and  the  proposed
development itself appears to meet all  codes  and  regulations.   Not  only
this, but  Topher  notices  with  admiration  that  the  new  infrastructure
associated with the Windsor Ridge development will definitely  help  resolve
one of Plebian’s  (and  his)  more  pressing  water  pressure  problems  and
transportation  bottlenecks.   This  is  just  the  type  of  benefit   that
Plebian’s new mayor, a long-time resident elected on a platform  of  managed
growth, emphasized in her campaign.  Since the mayor is  Topher’s  boss,  it
is clearly in Topher’s personal interest to approve the  development  if  it
satisfies all requirements.

Thus, Topher is torn.  On the one hand, he sees  the  economic  benefits  of
progress, but as Plebian’s native  son,  he  feels  sympathy  for  both  the
impacted community downstream and for  the  old-time  Plebian  residents  as
more of their precious community and land will be sacrificed  on  the  altar
of financial prosperity.

Of course, there is really not much Topher can do  other  than  approve  the
drawings, since after all, they are quite thorough.  But then  again,  there
might be something.  Topher realizes that the poor  families  downstream  of
Windsor Ridge would  make  the  perfect  “poster  children”  for  the  anti-
development faction in Plebian.  If the  leaders  of  this  faction  somehow
were to learn of Topher’s insight  about  the  potential  adverse  secondary
impacts, Topher is confident they could raise such a fuss  that  development
would surely halt.  All it would take is one clandestine phone call.

The beauty of Plebian’s environment and its culture for  future  generations
hangs in the balance.  What should Topher do?

Alternate  Approaches  and  Survey  Results  for  “Plains,   Prairies,   And
    Porsches” (Case 1032)
 1. Leak the news, quietly.  Topher should make the clandestine phone  call
    anonymously.  However, he should first confirm that the information  on
    the plans is public knowledge; i.e., the leak of information should not
    be traceable to him.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 4%

 2. Shock and awe.  Topher should seize  this  opportunity  to  unveil  his
    political ambitions and intentions to unseat the incumbent  mayor.   He
    should call a news conference, filmed on the steps  of  the  downstream
    residents’ church, where  he  speaks  directly  against  the  evils  of
    development and in favor of keeping Plebian the way  Jim  Barton  would
    have wanted it.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 4%

 3. Straddle the fence.  Topher is aware of a clause  in  the  City's  code
    dating from the 1960s that all developments which  tie  into  the  City
    water system must first have Water Board approval (specified  to  occur
    at a  public  meeting).   While  this  clause  has  not  been  recently
    enforced, Topher could conveniently use the opportunity to  advise  the
    Water Board to review the plans.  If he plays his cards  right,  Topher
    can give the appearance of supporting the project  (by  supporting  the
    water  system  improvements  in  the  public  forum)   while   bringing
    visibility to the project and alerting its potential opponents.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 0%

 4. Give advance warning.  Topher should call the design engineers in for a
    meeting. At the meeting, he should point out  the  potential  secondary
    impacts to the downstream residents and inform the engineers that  this
    is precisely the type of issue that the paper is looking for to use  as
    "anti-growth" ammunition.  If the project  engineers  are  smart,  they
    will ask Topher to put further consideration of  their  application  on
    hold while they consult with their client.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 30%

 5. Play hardball.  Topher should make it his policy  to  carefully  screen
    these and all other development plans for flaws, interpret questionable
    issues in favor of non-development, and enforce all requirements of the
    codes and regulations to the letter of the law. When  possible,  Topher
    should bog the application down with procedural matters;  i.e.,  harass
    the developer.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 4%

 6. Negotiate for success.  Topher should  call  the  developer  in  for  a
    meeting where he points out the potential downstream impacts,  and  the
    dire implications attending thereto.   Topher  should  then  offer  his
    assistance in achieving expeditious approval, and while  so  doing,  he
    should “invite” the developer to provide  major  financial  support  to
    several of Plebian’s cultural preservation, history and  heritage,  and
    community enrichment projects.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 19%

 7. Get involved.  Topher should approve the development  in  his  role  as
    City Engineer, but as private citizen (and on his  own  time)  leverage
    his anti-development views by assisting project  opposition  groups  as
    they rally opposition to the growth taking place in Plebian.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 22%

 8. Work the system.  If Topher feels very strongly about these issues  and
    is dissatisfied with current political leadership regarding growth  and
    development, he can enter private practice and then  become  active  in
    local politics to effect policies that he feels  are  more  appropriate
    for his town.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 7%

 9. Get with the program.  Topher should approve  the  application  without
    delay.  He is bound by his professional relationship with his  employer
    and responsibility as a  professional  engineer  to  fairly  judge  the
    project on its merits in compliance  with  local,  state,  and  federal
    statutes, regulations,  and  ordnances.   He  has  not  been  hired  to
    substitute his personal  preferences  over  reasonable  and  legitimate
    guidelines.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 11%

10. Hop on the bandwagon. The real  issue  is  the  revenue  that  the  new
    development  and  infrastructure  will  bring  to  Plebian.   Financial
    prosperity will always overcome  small  twangs  of  nostalgia.   Topher
    should invest in a franchise of “Starbuck’s,” use his  local  influence
    to buy up outparcels around Windsor Ridge, and ramp up his  net  worth.


      Percentage of votes agreeing: 0%

Forum Comments from Respondents
 1. Exactly what does  "modified  drainage  pattern"  mean  as  an  adverse
    impact?  If  the  proposed  site  increases  stormwater  flows  due  to
    development, or  it  increases  overland  velocities  causing  possible
    erosion, this condition  would  qualify  as  adverse  impact.   If  the
    proposed project meets all City\State\Federal criteria then  it  should
    move forward.  If the project causes strain on  the  public  street  or
    storm sewer system, then upgrading that infrastructure  should  be  the
    responsibility of the City if there are no defined development  upgrade
    fees.

 2. Topher faces both an engineering and a  political  problem.  Therefore,
    this requires  not  just  an  engineering  but  a  political  solution.
    Topher's first order of business is to realize that more  is  going  on
    here than just the numbers.  If he is politically astute,  Topher  will
    guide this situation to the appropriate forum where a solution  can  be
    worked out which gives due consideration to  all  the  interests.   His
    role is definitely not to bury this type of problem in  the  depths  of
    City Code provisions.

 3. None of the  alternatives  match  exactly  what  I  would  do  in  this
    situation. Of the choices given, probably the best  is  to  invite  the
    designers to a meeting and  explain  the  situation  and  ask  them  to
    mitigate the effects.

Comments from Board of Review Members
 1. The common wisdom long espoused by the development  community  is  that
    "development will pay for infrastructure improvement."  That is not the
    case and the opposite is true.  On that basis,  the  town  of  Plebian,
    Kansas is going to have narrow streets downtown, surrounding the little
    square, with four-lane, divided boulevards beginning at the former edge
    of town and radiating into the newly developed areas.   The  old-timers
    will be finding it difficult to travel downtown to  the  cafe  and  the
    feed store, and the newcomers won't want to.  This  situation  suggests
    the need for a  broader,  more  open,  political  review  and  approval
    process, rather than simply accepting plans within the  letter  of  the
    regulations.

 2. Topher Green has no  choice.   He  must  base  his  decision  on  sound
    engineering principals.  Personal feeling should  not  enter  into  the
    decision.    It  appears  that  the  project  meets  all   the   city’s
    regulations, ordinances, etc.  Assuming the  proposed  development  has
    resolved the traffic concerns in the poorer areas, the  project  should
    be approved.  If in the review of the project, Topher Green  determines
    that additional requirements should be adopted by the City  to  protect
    adjacent areas or  environmental  concerns,  he  should  recommend  the
    appropriate actions to the city administration.

 3. I believe Topher should meet with the developer and suggest  a  project
    mitigating the environment of the poor people that will be impacted  by
    the development, such as improved housing on the "habit  for  humanity"
    model.  He might also arrange for better jobs for  these  families.   I
    don't think he should fight the growth,  but  (assuming  the  mayor  is
    correctly managing it) be sure it continues along the correct path.   I
    believe the anti-growth people will just have  to  adjust.   I  suspect
    these anti-growth people are the ones who are  comfortable  financially
    and do not include the poor  of  the  area.   I  believe  it  would  be
    unethical for Topher to engage in  using  "poster  poor"  to  stop  the
    growth, but he might use the threat of it in case  the  developers  and
    big business people don't contribute as they should.

