

                This Land is Your Land, It’s Right by My Land
                                 (Case 1038)

The mission of the National Institute for Engineering Ethics  (NIEE)  is  to
promote ethics in engineering practice  and  education.   One  component  of
NIEE  is  the  Applied  Ethics  in  Professional  Practice  (AEPP)  program,
providing free engineering  ethics  cases  for  educational  purposes.   The
following case may be reprinted if it is provided  free  of  charge  to  the
engineer or  student.   Written  permission  is  required  if  the  case  is
reprinted for resale.  For more cases and other NIEE  Products  &  Services,
contact  the  National  Institute  for  Engineering   Ethics,   Texas   Tech
University, www.niee.org..  (All reprints must contain these statements)

The Case:
Daulton Squyres is a licensed engineer and project  manager  for  ClearWater
Developers.  Daulton faces a heady challenge – to get  a  high-profile,  90-
lot subdivision in Murray Township platted, designed, and constructed on  an
accelerated time schedule.  And, as is often the case,  Murray  Township  is
not known for being overly accommodating to out-of-town developers.   Still,
the economics of this project dictate that  things  move  quickly.   Daulton
needs to retain the services of a qualified local consultant, but  owing  to
the fact that ClearWater Developers has not previously  done  work  in  this
particular part of the state, he is not sure where to turn.

Engineers Elias Auften and Shellie Moore  are  in  a  joint  venture  in  an
engineering and construction management practice which  provides  civil  and
municipal engineering and construction management services for clients in  a
number of townships in the state.   Based  on  solid  qualifications  and  a
strong  reference  by  a  project  manager  friend  at  another  development
company, Daulton retains Elias and Shellie’s joint  venture  to  design  and
supervise construction of the subdivision in Murray Township.

Elias provides the engineering  design  and  Shellie  provides  construction
management services for the project.  Things move along  well,  and  Daulton
realizes that choosing this local firm was the key to getting the job  done.
 Locals trust locals – that’s all there is to it.  However, what  Elias  and
Shellie characterize as a “slight  snag”  does  come  up.  During  a  design
review, officials of Murray Township determine that a second  road  will  be
needed to access the subdivision.   This  second  road  exits  into  Walbert
Township,  which  is  adjacent  to  Murray  Township.   As   engineers   for
ClearWater, the responsibility for choosing  the  actual  location  for  the
road, and designing it, will fall to Elias and Shellie.

The addition of the road introduces a degree of complexity to  the  project,
mainly because it means another political  entity,  Walbert  Township,  must
now get involved.  Daulton starts to sweat the schedule, especially when  he
learns that Elias and Shellie’s joint  venture  happens  to  also  serve  as
municipal engineer in Walbert Township.  By  virtue  of  Elias  and  Shellie
working on the subdivision in Murray Township, but also serving as  engineer
for Walbert Township, a potential conflict of interest exists.

But Daulton knows he cannot cut corners here.  As  per  ethical  engineering
practice, the joint venture  of  Elias  and  Shellie  discloses  to  Walbert
Township  its  relationship  with  ClearWater  Developers  relative  to  the
subdivision for Murray Township.  On this basis, Walbert Township  does  not
object  to  Elias  and  Shellie  making  a  recommendation   regarding   the
feasibility of the  construction  of  the  proposed  road.   Thereafter,  as
municipal engineer for Walbert Township, Elias and Shellie’s  joint  venture
recommends that Walbert Township approve construction of the proposed  road.


This is excellent news for Daulton –he will make  his  schedule  after  all.
The project moves forward, with Elias and Shellie modifying  the  design  to
include the new road.  The addition of  the  road  requires  the  previously
unanticipated acquisition of  property  in  Walbert  Township,  and  Daulton
contacts ClearWater’s corporate  “land  man”  in  the  home  office,  Conner
Williams, authorizing him to negotiate to purchase the property.

A short while later, Daulton gets a call from Conner who asks  him  to  come
look at a surveyor’s  plat  associated  with  the  “Walbert  Road”  property
acquisition.  The problem is, to facilitate the new road,  it  appears  that
ClearWater will have to purchase more land than they ever thought  would  be
necessary.  According to Conner, an astute landowner in Walbert  is  holding
out for “big bucks.”  He is unwilling to cooperate unless Clearwater  agrees
to buy not only what they asked for but also some  nearby  out-parcels  that
the landowner claims would not be worth much as  stand-alone  lots.   Conner
knows the opposite is true – property values will go  up  dramatically  when
the subdivision is built – and in his opinion, the landowner is engaging  in
what can be viewed as legalized extortion.

Given the significance of the project, and the lack of viable  alternatives,
Daulton decides that ClearWater cannot  afford  further  delays  and  deftly
authorizes that Conner purchase the property needed  for  the  second  road.
But as he is about to leave the room, Daulton’s eye catches a detail he  had
not noticed before.  In the particular area of  the  surveyor’s  plat  which
shows the outlying parcels that ClearWater will have to purchase,  there  is
a significant parcel of land that the plat  identifies  as  being  owned  by
Elias and Shellie’s joint venture!  At no time did Elias  and  Shellie  ever
mention  that  they  owned  this  property;  this  was  not  part  of  their
disclosure to Walbert Township or to anyone else.

Daulton is stunned.  By recommending construction of the  second  road  into
Walbert Township – the location of which they personally chose –  Elias  and
Shellie have just enriched themselves!   This  new  road  will  dramatically
increase the value of  their  property,  just  as  it  will  for  the  other
landowner.

Daulton also realizes something else: his land  man  is  not  aware  of  the
situation.  Being from out of town, Conner doesn’t know all of  the  project
history and thus has not picked up on the significance of this  point.   The
funny thing is, Daulton would never have learned about this if  that  greedy
landowner hadn’t insisted that ClearWater purchase  the  outparcels  –  thus
requiring that they and their adjacent properties be included on the plat!

Taking the plat and accompanying field notes to his  office,  Daulton  tells
Conner that he wants to mull  things  over  a  bit.   Back  in  his  office,
Daulton confirms that indeed, Elias and Shellie’s joint  venture  owns  this
undeveloped property in Walbert Township, and their property value  will  be
positively affected by the construction of the new road.

The implications make Daulton’s head  swim.   This  is  clearly  an  ethical
problem for Elias and Shellie,  since  they  did  not  disclose  their  land
interest when they had the perfect opportunity to do so.  Worse  than  that,
even  if  their  “engineering”  recommendation  to  build   the   road   was
technically  justifiable,  at  the  very  least,  they  will  appear  to  be
motivated  by  desire  for  self  aggrandizement.    And   at   the   worst,
politically, this could become a nightmare for  ClearWater  Developers.   If
the press got hold of  this  news,  all  the  community  good  will  Daulton
labored to build would be  lost  and  would  be  replaced  with  a  watchdog
attitude that would hamper everything.  The project might never  get  built,
and ClearWater’s investment would be lost.

Slowly, Daulton begins to realize that if he were to reveal what  Elias  and
Shellie are doing, ClearWater would surely suffer.  At the  same  time,  the
thought crosses Daulton’s furrowed brow that his darkest fear  could  become
his strongest defense.  No bad things would happen if no one  learned  about
Elias and Shellie’s land interest.  They  certainly  don’t  intend  to  tell
anyone, and Daulton has good reason to think that Elias and Shellie  believe
their ploy remains undiscovered.  Further,  it  would  be  easy  enough  for
Daulton  to  discreetly  have  the  plat  reconfigured  so  that  Elias  and
Shellie’s name is deleted, practically ensuring that no one would  ever  put
“two and two” together.  In this way, even if things were  discovered  later
on, he could plead ignorance and direct the  blame  to  Elias  and  Shellie.
After all, they created this problem, not him.

What should Daulton do?

Alternate Approaches and Survey Results
Note:  This case is adapted, with  permission,  from  the  Opinions  of  the
National Society of Professional Engineers (NSPE) Board  of  Ethical  Review
(BER), Case 97-4, “Conflict of Interest - Reviewing Own Work  -  Failure  to
Disclose Property of Ownership/Relationship of Developer.”  We modified  the
facts and discussion for purposes of clarity and pedagogical  effectiveness,
and all person, place and business names herein are  purely  fictional.   To
view the original case and the actual  findings  of  the  NSPE  BER,  please
access this case on-line at  the  website  of  the  National  Institute  for
Engineering Ethics:  http://www.niee.org/cases/index.htm
Alternate Approaches:
   1. Let nature take its course.   Daulton has done nothing wrong,  and  it
      would in fact be wrong for his  project  to  suffer  as  a  result  of
      someone else’s misdeed.  So as to  not  hinder  the  project,  Daulton
      should say nothing and to do nothing.   Perhaps  no  one  will  notice
      Elias and Shellie’s nearby land interest.  If they don’t, that is good
      for Daulton.  If by chance someone does  notice  Elias  and  Shellie’s
      land interest, hopefully by that  time  the  project  will  have  been
      built, Daulton can plead ignorance and dismay, and Elias  and  Shellie
      can face the consequences of their actions.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 0%
   2. Clean up the documents.  It would be nice if somehow Daulton could get
      the project built without delay while at the same time bringing  Elias
      and Shellie to justice.  But Daulton can’t afford any delay, and  even
      if it means that he “indirectly” aids and abets Elias and  Shellie  in
      their scheme, it is better that this issue never  sees  the  light  of
      day.  Remember, this  is  not  Daulton’s  problem;  it  is  Elias  and
      Shellie’s.  Daulton should direct that Elias  and  Shellie’s  name  be
      removed from the plat – virtually assuring that  no  one  will  notice
      their land interest – and go on with his business.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 0%
   3. Check things out.  Daulton should retain a trusted engineer  colleague
      in a nearby state to quietly provide him with a second opinion  as  to
      whether Elias and Shellie’s recommendation for the road was justified.
       The only valid concern here – if there is one – is whether Elias  and
      Shellie are unjustly enriching themselves by means of  the  fact  that
      they stand to personally gain from their  land  interest  if  the  new
      Walbert road is built.  Arguably, this influence might have  corrupted
      their judgment.  However, if their decision for the road stands on its
      own technical merit, politics and personalities aside,  there  was  no
      corruption of judgment and there is no ethical problem.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 8%
   4. Call Elias and Shellie.  A standard ethics provision is that engineers
      are to conduct themselves honorably so as to  enhance  the  honor  and
      reputation of the profession.  At a  bare  minimum,  this  would  mean
      giving Elias and Shellie the benefit of the doubt – things  might  not
      be what they seem.  Daulton should invite Elias and  Shellie  to  meet
      with him and Conner, show them what he  has  learned,  appraise  their
      response, and take it from there.     Percentage  of  votes  agreeing:
      33%

   5. Propose a civic donation.  It is naïve to think that Elias and Shellie
      are innocent – Daulton has the information that condemns  them!   But,
      being  civically  minded,  Daulton  could  use  this  opportunity   to
      “encourage” Elias and Shellie to become strong supporters of both  the
      Murray and Walbert communities.  Having  ascertained  from  Conner  an
      estimate as to how much money Elias and Shellie stand to gain from the
      increase in their land value, Daulton should invite Elias and  Shellie
      to a meeting where he shows them what he has learned and proposes that
      they generously donate this amount of money to both the Murray and the
      Walbert historic societies.  Such a donation is  the  only  reasonable
      way to ensure good will and future success of all  parties  concerned.


      Percentage of votes agreeing: 0%
   6. Generate some revenue.  It is naïve to think that  Elias  and  Shellie
      are innocent – Daulton has the information that condemns  them!   But,
      Daulton is a businessman, so he could use this opportunity to generate
      some revenue for the  company.   Having  ascertained  from  Conner  an
      estimate as to how much money Elias and Shellie stand to gain from the
      increase in their land value, Daulton should invite Elias and  Shellie
      to a meeting where he shows them what he has learned and suggests that
      they have made an error in their billings.  Daulton could then propose
      that Elias and Shellie deduct twice this amount of  money  from  their
      invoice for services rendered.  This type of accounting entry  is  the
      only reasonable way to ensure good will  and  future  success  of  all
      parties concerned.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 0%
   7. Get some input.  Situations like this are why there are ethics experts
      and why there are lawyers.  Daulton should make general inquiry to his
      local professional society, seeking  their  perspectives  and  advice.
      Further, Daulton should contact his company’s legal counsel, tell them
      what he knows, and have them advise him as to how  proceed  so  as  to
      best protect the interests of the company.   Daulton  should  document
      everything for the file, and call the clients  to  apprise  them  that
      there might be a delay.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 35%
   8. Call Murray and Walbert Townships.  Perhaps the best way to proceed is
      to let the locals take care of things.  Maybe they really  don’t  mind
      if Elias and Shellie profit from the increase in land  value,  and  in
      effect they would approve of things as they are. Daulton should inform
      representatives of  Murray  and  Walbert  Townships  of  what  he  has
      learned, point out what he believes are the ethical concerns, and  let
      them take it from there.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 4%
   9. Call the State P.E. Board.  Daulton knows that the state’s engineering
      practice  act  requires  that  engineers  “…disclose  all  actual   or
      potential conflicts of interest.”  This means that Elias  and  Shellie
      have stepped cleanly into the  cross-hairs  of  an  ethics  violation.
      Further, the state’s engineering practice act  requires  that  Daulton
      report violations that he knows of.  This one’s a no-brainer.  Daulton
      should “turn in” Elias and Shellie.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 19%
  10. Call the Press.  It has to be kept in mind that ClearWater  Developers
      has done nothing wrong, and it is Daulton’s job to make sure that  his
      firm and the project do not suffer as a result of Elias and  Shellie’s
      apparent malfeasance.  The best way to deal with this is to get public
      opinion on ClearWater’s side, fully and from  the  beginning.   Proper
      “spin” will help Daulton  and  everyone  else  negotiate  through  the
      problem with minimal impact to the project.  Daulton should leak  what
      he knows to a reporter for the local papers, and let the press take it
      from there.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 0%

Forum Comments from Respondents
   1. As soon as Daulton has discussed this matter with Elias  and  Shellie,
      he should discuss it with the two Townships so  that  all  potentially
      affected parties are aware of the conflict.  After discussion with the
      two townships, Daulton  should  remove  Elias  and  Shellie  from  the
      project and replace them with a more ethical engineer.

   2.  Firstly  Daulton  should  talk  with  the  company's  legal  counsel.
      Depending on the advice they have  for  him,  then  it  would  be  the
      correct course of action to inform the state PE board that members are
      in violation.

   3. Before jumping to conclusions, Daulton should  first  call  Elias  and
      Shellie to find out  for  sure  what  the  reasons  are  behind  their
      actions.  Once Daulton discusses the situation with Elias and Shellie,
      further actions can be taken.

   4. A combination of option 4 (call Elias and Shellie) and option 9  (call
      the State P.E.  Board)  seems  appropriate.  In  the  event  that  the
      conversation with Elias and Shellie proves that Elias and Shellie  are
      profiting personally from the sale of property, then  the  P.E.  Board
      should be contacted.

   5. Daulton should first check whether or not the road is  necessary.   If
      the road is not necessary, then it  shouldn’t  be  built  and  Daulton
      should let Elias and Shellie know why.  If the road is necessary, then
      Daulton should still let Elias and Shellie know what he knows  and  he
      should let them make the next move.

   6. Daulton must  act  in  his  company's  best  interest  in  this  case,
      especially if the new road will be costing  his  company  more  money.
      For this reason Daulton should place the  decision  in  his  company's
      hands.

   7. Option 4 (call Elias and Shellie) seems to be the most ethical choice.
       It appears that the two  engineers  have  overstepped  their  bounds;
      however, Daulton should confront them first and find out their  story.
      He can then determine whether further action has to be taken.

   8. As a professional courtesy it would  be  appropriate  for  Daulton  to
      bring up the situation to Elias and  Shellie  first.   Daulton  should
      also ask someone who is impartial to the  situation  to  look  at  the
      plans to see what is technically best.

   9. Guideline #5 of ASCE's Standards of Professional conduct  states  that
      it is an employee's responsibility to protect  an  employer's  "assets
      against loss, theft, and misuse." It also states in Section 4 #1  that
      "questions of guidance . . . may be asked anonymously."  I feel  these
      statements make alternative 7 (get some input) the most appropriate.

  10. This is a difficult decision because Daulton does not know  the  exact
      intent of Elias and  Shellie.   He  should  confront  both  Elias  and
      Shellie to learn more about them and their motives  for  building  the
      road.  Daulton also must contact his legal counsel because  it  is  in
      his best interest to inform his company of a  possible  delay  due  to
      legal issues.

  11. Ethically this dilemma centers on a  huge  conflict  of  interest  for
      Elias and Shellie, and Daulton needs to inform the owner of Clearwater
      Developers about it.  This problem has the potential to jeopardize the
      reputation of Daulton’s company, so the boss  should  know  about  the
      situation to get more professional advice.

  12. Daulton should initiate a sit-down meeting  with  Elias,  Shellie  and
      Conner to find out what is really going on (as explained  in  approach
      #4). Then, with this input, Daulton should take what  he  and  learned
      and seek advice from his local professional society and the  company's
      legal counsel (as explained in approach #7).

  13. I think that clearly Elias and Shellie are in the wrong,  but  at  the
      same time we have to consider the client's interest, and  how  turning
      them in might delay the  project.  By  communicating  with  his  local
      professional society, and his company's legal counsel,  Daulton  would
      be able to make a more informed decision.

Comments from Board of Review Members
   1. The fact that Elias and Shellie own property in Walbert Township,  the
      value of which will be positively affected by the new road they locate
      and design, is an actual – not potential – conflict of interest.  This
      puts Elias and Shellie in the untenable situation of having  to  serve
      two masters: the  client  or  themselves.   Disclosure  of  this  land
      interest would not be sufficient to allay  the  problem;  the  obvious
      course of action would be for Elias and Shellie to  divest  themselves
      of the property or decline to work on  the  project.   But  Elias  and
      Shellie did not disclose  their  land  interest.   Instead  they  said
      nothing, and their failure to disclose an actual conflict of  interest
      is tantamount to deception.  As much  as  he  might  wish  to  do  so,
      Daulton cannot simply sweep this under the rug.  Elias and Shellie are
      clearly in violation of engineering law and the code of  ethics.   The
      obvious place to start  is  communication  with  his  company's  legal
      counsel.  From  there,  Daulton  should  contact  Murray  and  Walbert
      Townships, and then perhaps convene a meeting with Elias and  Shellie.



