
                       Paying Attention to the Details
                                 (Case 1017)

The mission of the National Institute for Engineering Ethics  (NIEE)  is  to
promote ethics in engineering practice  and  education.   One  component  of
NIEE  is  the  Applied  Ethics  in  Professional  Practice  (AEPP)  program,
providing free engineering  ethics  cases  for  educational  purposes.   The
following case may be reprinted if it is provided  free  of  charge  to  the
engineer or  student.   Written  permission  is  required  if  the  case  is
reprinted for resale.  For more cases and other NIEE  Products  &  Services,
contact  the  National  Institute  for  Engineering   Ethics,   Texas   Tech
University, www.niee.org..  (All reprints must contain these statements)

The Case:
Bert Bowser is a real "go-getter" engineer.   He  is  known  throughout  the
engineering community for his ability to get a job done on time  and  within
budget.  He has a Masters degree in civil engineering, has been in  practice
for 15 years and is a registered  professional  engineer  in  the  state  in
which he works.  In  fact,  Bert's  reputation  recently  convinced  a  much
larger engineering firm (Far Horizons Engineering) to offer him  a  sizeable
promotion to  go  to  work  for  them.   After  considerable  thought,  Bert
accepted the offer and changed jobs.  The parting between Bert and  the  old
firm  (County  Line  Design)  was  amiable  since  Bert's  former  employers
understood the unique opportunity being offered to Bert,  even  though  they
preferred he stay with them.

Bert began his new job with gusto and quickly became  deeply  involved  with
his assigned projects.  He  was  amazed  at  the  work  volume  in  his  new
company.  After working in the new job for about a month,  Bert  reviewed  a
set of 'in-house' prepared drawings.  As he reviewed the  detail  sheets  he
noticed something very familiar.  He realized that  these  details  were  an
exact copy of a set that he and two other  engineers  labored  over  in  his
previous job at County Line Design.

Bert is aware that the technology used for structural  connections  was  the
industry standard, but  the  manner  of  presentation  was  distinctive  and
clearly the work of his former  company.   Bert  called  Far  Horizons  head
draftsperson and asked who drew the detail sheets.  The drafter stated  that
he wasn't sure who first drew the details, but the originals  probably  came
either from in-house work or from a sub-contractor who  had  been  paid  for
the effort.  As for this particular set of drawings, the detail sheets  were
simply inserted from the company's database of CADD drawing details and  the
name of the project added in the title blocks of each sheet, along with  Far
Horizons name and logo.

Bert remembered that his old firm, County Line Design,  had once been a sub-
contractor for his present employer.  However, he is sure that his  previous
firm had not given permission for "carte blanche' use  of  pieces  of  those
previous drawings for other unrelated projects.

What, if anything, should Bert do at this point?


Alternate Approaches  and  Survey  Results  for  “Paying  Attention  to  the
Details” (Case 1017)
1.    He should feel  proud  that  Far  Horizons  thought  so  much  of  his
    previous work that they have incorporated the design details into their
    own standard contract sheets.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  0%

2.    Bert Bowser should realize that he has an outstanding  job,  and  just
    forget about the possible infringement on some other firm's work.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  0%

3.    What's the problem?  Bert is being  too  sensitive  and  naïve.   Good
    details are copied all the time  from  one  firm  to  another,  as  are
    sections of construction specifications.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  4%

4.    Since the information shown on  the  detail  sheets  is  all  standard
    practice, getting  upset  because  the  format  is  the  same  as  that
    developed while Bert was at  County  Line  Design  is  meaningless  and
    counterproductive.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  3%

5.    There is no problem here.  If Bert were to put together a new  set  of
    detail sheets for use as Far Horizons standards, he would end  up  with
    the same thing they already have and are using.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  0%

6.    This is nothing to be concerned about.  Far Horizons paid County  Line
    for the detail sheets as part of their subcontract with County Line  on
    a former project.  There is no ethical dilemma here.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  1%

7.    He should point out to his  present  company  that  using  the  detail
    sheets as part of their own 'boiler plate' negates any legal  liability
    County Line Design had if there are errors in the  details.   This  now
    becomes the legal responsibility of his present company.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  6%

8.    He should immediately make a telephone call  to  his  former  boss  at
    County Line Design to tell her what he has  discovered,  and  let  them
    take whatever action they deem advisable.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  0%

9.    He should go to County Line Design, tell them what he  has  uncovered,
    and ask for his former job back.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  0%

10.   He should discuss the issue with  his  present  boss,  agree  to  keep
    silent about the use of these detail sheets as Far  Horizons  standards
    (after all, Far Horizons paid for their development in connection  with
    a former project), and negotiate a raise now and  a  promotion  in  the
    future.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  0%

11.   He should discuss this discovery with his new boss  at  Far  Horizons,
    expressing his concerns about the origin and ownership of these  detail
    sheets, and that using them as Far Horizons standards may  be  illegal,
    depending on the terms of the contract under which they were  developed
    regarding ownership of documents.  He should ask for an explanation  of
    the firm's view of  his  concerns  and  how  Far  Horizons  intends  to
    approach handling the matter.  He should also follow up on his  request
    to confirm that the matter has been addressed by Far Horizons.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  52%

12.   Bert should recommend to his boss at Far Horizons that he go  back  to
    County Line to negotiate a written agreement which permits Far Horizons
    to use the detail sheets as part  of  their  standard  design  contract
    package.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  6%

13.   If Bert's new boss is not a principal in the firm, he  should  give  a
    'bare bones' description of the perceived problem  to  his  boss,  then
    request that a principal in the firm  be  brought  in  to  discuss  the
    matter as well.  Perhaps the level of  communication  between  the  Far
    Horizons principal  and  her  counterpart  at  County  Line  Design  is
    sufficiently amicable, they may be  able  to  work  out  a  cooperative
    agreement over the telephone for use  of  the  detail  sheets.   In  so
    doing, it will be necessary for Far Horizons to admit  they  have  been
    unknowingly using the County Line details for a number of projects.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  14%

14.   Bert should push to have the matter clarified and cleared  up  between
    the two companies so that County Line Design does not come across these
    detail sheets later on and think that Bert stole  the  sheets  when  he
    switched jobs!
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  10%

15.   What an underhanded move by Far Horizons!  Were they such an  inferior
    engineering company before Bert arrived that they have to reply on work
    done by another firm for use as Far Horizons standards?  He should keep
    his mouth shut (no one likes a tattle-tale, and consulting  engineering
    is a small community), but start looking for a  position  with  another
    company, perhaps out of the area so this problem does continue to haunt
    him.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  0%

16.   Bert should send a copy of the detail sheets to  the  State  Board  of
    Registration for Professional Engineers and suggest they look into  the
    matter as a possible breach of professional ethics.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 3%

17.   Bert should seek the advice of a private lawyer.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  1%


Forum Comments from Respondents
1.    Thank you for bringing this up.  Actually this happens  all  over  the
    country, particularly with  structural  standard  details.   Civil  and
    highway  engineering  clients  are  more  localized  and  favor   local
    details…they will even give you those details!!  However, it  does  not
    greatly concern me if folks copy our details.  Most of the details  are
    the same details that were used for decades previously.  I have  looked
    at old plans and old books, and details change only to the degree  that
    equipment or materials change.

2.    Bert should go to his new boss and inform her of  the  situation,  and
    that if he is correct about the source of the drawings he  will  go  to
    his previous employer with the information.  His previous employer will
    likely take legal action  for  fraudulent  use  of  their  intellectual
    property and bring this to the state Board of  Registration  for  their
    consideration.

3.    Like it or not, I suspect that in a way this sort  of  plagiarism  has
    been going on for thousands of years.  Craftsmen  copied  the  work  of
    other craftsmen when they had a good idea and the ones whose  work  was
    copied took solace in the fact that "plagiarism is the highest form  of
    compliment", I suppose.  Today it's first to market that matters in the
    marketplace and the real innovators are usually there first.

4.    The real issue here is ownership of  the  detail  documents.   If  the
    previous  contract  between  Far  Horizons  and  County  Line  included
    specific language indicating  that  ownership  of  the  work  documents
    (e.g., design details) developed by Far Horizons in the conduct of  the
    contract remained the property of Far Horizons,  then  County  Line  is
    clearly involved, no matter how unwitting, in an illegal action and  it
    is imperative that a reasonable  solution  between  the  two  firms  be
    reached in an amicable manner.  If, however, there was no statement  of
    proprietary rights in the contract regarding  the  documents  developed
    for the previous project, it is  unlikely  that  the  cost  and  effort
    involved in proving the design details were the exclusive  intellectual
    property of Far Horizons would be worth the small financial  return  to
    be realized, if any, by pursuing  the  issue  through  legal  channels.
    Again, all the more reason to come to some sort of  amicable  agreement
    between the two firms regarding the use of the details.

