
                              Don't Bank On It!
                                 (Case 1025)

The mission of the National Institute for Engineering Ethics  (NIEE)  is  to
promote ethics in engineering practice  and  education.   One  component  of
NIEE  is  the  Applied  Ethics  in  Professional  Practice  (AEPP)  program,
providing free engineering  ethics  cases  for  educational  purposes.   The
following case may be reprinted if it is provided  free  of  charge  to  the
engineer or  student.   Written  permission  is  required  if  the  case  is
reprinted for resale.  For more cases and other NIEE  Products  &  Services,
contact  the  National  Institute  for  Engineering   Ethics,   Texas   Tech
University, www.niee.org..  (All reprints must contain these statements)

The Case:
Two years ago your firm was retained by a  banking  institution  (commercial
bank) to be the geotechnical engineering consultant  for  the  design  of  a
multi-story building in  an  urban  setting.   The  site  for  the  proposed
building was  on  a  sloping  hillside  and  the  adjacent  uphill  property
contained a decrepit two-story, wood-framed building  in  poor  repair.   It
was understood that any new buyer for this adjacent property would  demolish
the existing structure and construct a new office building.

The design of the  new  bank/office  building  required  a  relatively  deep
basement excavation into the hillside immediately  adjacent  to  the  uphill
property line.  In order to construct the  basement  retaining  wall,  which
was three stories in height at its maximum horizontal penetration  into  the
sloping hillside, it was necessary to drill a number  of  temporary  tieback
supports into the soils on the adjacent property.  This was  done  in  order
to avoid having to  brace  the  retaining  wall  from  inside  the  building
footprint and having to deal with the disruption to construction  operations
that the presence of such inclined struts and kicker  blocks  would  create.
Once construction of the basement wall was completed and braced by  interior
floors, the tiebacks were scheduled to be de-stressed and abandoned.

Your firm told the bank's project manager that it  would  be  necessary  for
the bank to obtain permission to  install  the  temporary  tiebacks  in  the
soils below the neighboring uphill property, and made a written  comment  to
that effect in the design report for the  project.   Copies  of  the  report
were sent to the bank for their use and for distribution  to  the  architect
and structural engineer for the project.

During construction the  contractor  installed  the  required  tiebacks  and
anchors extending under  the  adjacent  uphill  property,  but  neither  the
contractor nor the bank contacted the  adjacent  property  owner  to  obtain
permission to do so.  At the end of  construction,  the  tiebacks  were  not
abandoned, as originally planned.

After the new  building  was  completed  and  occupied,  the  owner  of  the
adjacent  property  filed  a  law  suit  against  the  bank,  the   building
contractor, the architect, the structural design  engineer  and  your  firm,
claiming total damages in the amount of $35,000  for  unlawful  encroachment
(trespass) and use of his property.

In the process of the ensuing litigation, your lawyer  has  pointed  out  to
the adjacent property owner that you had advised the bank  and  its  project
manager verbally, and in writing in the design report,  that  it  was  their
responsibility to obtain  the  necessary  permission,  and  to  negotiate  a
reasonable charge for the temporary use of the soils  beneath  the  adjacent
property for the installation of the tiebacks and anchors.

The plaintiff (adjacent property owner) has refused to let your firm out  of
the law suit, but a week before the case is scheduled to be tried in  court,
he has offered to settle with your firm individually for a lump sum  payment
of $15,000, even though you and your lawyer still  have  evidence  that  you
were not responsible for any of the alleged damages.

What should you do?

(Note: In the process of deciding what to do, try to identify who among  the
various parties concerned with this action acted unethically, and why.)


Alternate Approaches and Survey Results for “Don’t Bank On It!” (Case 1025)

1.    This is ridiculous! Your firm is on record as  advising  the  bank  to
    obtain permission  for  the  use  of  the  subsurface  portion  of  the
    plaintiff’s property. This whole  thing  smells  of  extortion  by  the
    plaintiff.  You should go to court to prove that your firm had  nothing
    to do with these alleged damages, no  matter  what  the  legal  defense
    costs to your firm may be.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 7%

2.    You should file for a Summary  Judgment  ruling  by  the  court.   The
    judge will then review the facts of the case and  decide  whether  your
    firm has any responsibility for the claimed damages.  If he finds  your
    firm not responsibility for the damages claimed, the court will release
    you from the suit.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 62%

3.    Settle for the  amount  requested  by  the  plaintiff.   It  is  legal
    blackmail but settling out of court could be less  expensive  than  the
    alternative of defending your firm in court.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 3%

4.    You should counter sue the plaintiff for bringing a frivolous  lawsuit
    against your firm.  As such, an impartial expert will be asked to judge
    whether or not your firm had any liability with regard to  the  alleged
    damages.  You should be aware that all the plaintiff need  do  to  keep
    your firm in the original suit is to find an “expert” who will say that
    you firm had some responsibility, no matter how small.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 1%

5.    You should make a counter-offer to the plaintiff to release your  firm
    from the suit for a settlement of $5,000, since  your  legal  fees  for
    defense will likely be more than that amount.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 11%

6.    You should file a  cross-complaint  against  the  bank  because  their
    inaction on your firm’s recommendation caused you to  be  brought  into
    the lawsuit.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 6%

7.    You should make a deal with the plaintiff to testify  for  them  as  a
    friendly, rather than hostile, witness about the warning your firm gave
    to the bank in the design report.  Offer to do this contingent on being
    released from the case.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 10%


Forum Comments from Respondents

Student responses:
1.    It could be extortion.  Could there  really  be  $35,000  in  damages?
    Why did the [adjacent property]  owner  wait  until  the  building  was
    finished, before saying anything?  [ed. note: a  perceptive  comment  –
    see the Epilogue below]

2.    The engineer should not have designed  the  system  before  there  was
    written permission to use  the  soils  below  the  existing  [adjacent]
    structure… The engineer is as responsible for the suit as the owner and
    contractor for suggesting the tie back method.

3.    The structural engineer and architect are  also  responsible  for  not
    making sure that the proper paper work  was  taken  care  of  prior  to
    proceeding with the work.

4.    Learn your lesson here and follow up on such matters before  beginning
    [of construction of] the project.   If  you  [make]  a  recommendation,
    check back to see what  the  decision  was  prior  to  working  on  the
    ‘assumption’ that it was approved and handled correctly!

5.    You should have checked that  your  verbal  and  written  instructions
    concerning [protection of] the adjacent property were followed.    This
    may only have required a phone call to the  owner  before  construction
    began.  The bank was negligent, but this could have been easily avoided
    with better management on your part.

      [Ed. note for comments 2-5: unfortunately,  as  a  consultant  to  the
    owner, or especially as a subconsultant to the structural  engineer  or
    architect  for  a  project,  you  often  are  involved  in  the  design
    recommendations, but rarely in the legal aspects of the  project,  such
    as obtaining permission from an adjacent land owner, nor  do  you  have
    the authority to make obtaining such permission happen.  The  issue  is
    even more perplexing if there is  a  considerable  hiatus  between  the
    completion of your design recommendations and completion  of  the  full
    project design, not to mention initiation of construction.  The project
    may  be  put  on  hold  for  some  extended  time   pending   financing
    arrangements or regulatory permitting, and you are often  not  notified
    of the project status until it is well under construction, if  at  all.
    While the criticisms above  are  justifiable  in  an  ideal  consulting
    environment,  they  are  often  not  obtainable  in  the  real   world,
    especially if you are dealing with an  obstinate  client.  That  having
    been said, this situation is one that arises all too often  and  should
    be recognized and avoided whenever possible.]

6.    The owner of [the adjacent] property could easily have taken  care  of
    this  situation  much  earlier  than  the  litigation  stage  following
    construction.  This, as in many lawsuits, seems to  be  an  attempt  to
    extort money from a large corporation who is more likely  to  settle  a
    case than take chances with a jury's judgement.   To  the  bank  and  a
    large A/E firm the amount of damages in the lawsuit is minimal and most
    companies would take the loss rather than put their reputation  on  the
    line.  In most of these types of lawsuits, when an innocent party  with
    a strong case files a counterclaim for wrongful suit, legal  fees,  and
    other damages due to bad press, the case goes away quickly.

7.    I would make  no  deals  or  cross-complaints  as  this  would  likely
    prevent me from ever getting work in this town again  –  regardless  of
    guilt.  Summary judgment would be the fastest, cheapest way  to  finish
    the case since I have proof I am in the clear.

8.    I would seek a judge’s ruling because any unbiased party could see  my
    innocence and I would be OK.  I would be hesitant to do any  more  work
    for the bank.

      [Ed. note for comments 6-8: Filing for summary judgment is a  possible
    remedy  for  this  situation.   Unfortunately,  many  judges  are   not
    conversant with technical issues,, and are  wary  of  making  dismissal
    judgments that could be looked upon as erroneous by peers or  a  higher
    court.  As a result, it is often more expedient for the judge  to  deny
    the summary judgment motion, which then tends  to  lock  the  defendant
    into a trial scenario.  As a rule of thumb, it is not  wise  to  assume
    that just because the right or wrong of a situation is obvious to  you,
    the court will agree with you, for reasons you  can’t  imagine  or  for
    motivations  well  beyond  your  comprehension  or  control.   See  the
    Epilogue, below.]

Comments from Board of Review members:
1.     Cross  claim  against  the  bank  because  their  inaction   on   the
    geotechnical firm’s recommendation caused them (the geotechnical  firm)
    to be damaged.

2.    In my opinion, this is not an ethical issue,  but  rather  a  business
    issue.  It is costly to go to court – attorneys’  fees,  design  firm’s
    staff time, etc.  The decision should be based on a comparison of  cost
    of settlement vs. cost of going to court.  Also, settlement brings  the
    matter to a close, unless the property owner  and/or  bank  bring  some
    type of action against the design professional.  Also, going  to  trial
    has no assurance that the design professional will win.  In  this  case
    it appears that settlement is the best action to take.  The expense  of
    a court case probably would exceed the cost of the settlement.

3.    Give him $15,000 and run.  The attorneys will spend way more  of  your
    money than that before the trial ends (probably already has).  It would
    seem that your firm was involved in the construction process, too.  You
    should also check your internal check policies.  Someone did not follow
    through on determining whether your firm’s recommendations to the  bank
    about obtaining the abutter’s permission  were  followed.   That  is  a
    dangerous situation, and  more  than  a  little  worrisome  for  future
    projects.

4.    Where’s the ethical dilemma?  It appears instead to be a  simple  loss
    prevention case.  We would have called in  our  professional  society’s
    loss prevention insurance advisor at the first hint of a  suit  by  the
    adjacent land owner.  They would have handled it from there, and  would
    probably have accepted the $15,000 settlement offer as it would be less
    than the cost of defending the firm during the discovery  process  (let
    alone trial!).  If  the  $15,000  gives  the  plaintiff  land  owner  a
    monetary resource to go after the other defendants, that’s  simply  too
    bad.  The design professional had no  obligation  to  the  construction
    contractor, and the client was  warned  in  writing  (but  ignored  the
    warning).

5.    Many of the schools in the country still do not teach (or  know)  much
    about loss prevention and limitation of liability.  I agree  that  this
    case is not one in which the principal in the  firm  is  faced  with  a
    large ethical issue (other than if it is ethical to pay off a shakedown
    when you are clearly in  the  right  –  or  is  it  “a  cost  of  doing
    business”?).

      The other ethical consideration centers on the “right” to sue for  any
    perceived issue at all (even when an equitable  offer  for  restitution
    may have been made), especially when  the  potential  defendant  has  a
    “deep pocket”  (i.e., the bank, as well as the designer team  members);
    whether it is ethical for lawyers to pull the trigger on a shotgun  and
    name anyone who walked on or by a site in the complaint and suit  (what
    is the principal canon of ethics in the legal profession?); and perhaps
    what motivates the plaintiff in these cases.


Epilogue

You did, in fact, reluctantly pay the $15,000 settlement to be removed  from
the case with the proviso that there  was  no  additional  recourse  against
your  firm.   This  was  advised  by  your  attorney  (appointed   by   your
professional liability insurance carrier) as “a  cost  of  doing  business.”
The transaction occurred only a few days before the trial was  scheduled  to
begin.

The trial was held and an engineering geologist appearing  in  court  as  an
expert for the plaintiff told  the  jury  that  the  entire  design  of  the
building and retaining system  was  faulty,  since  it  is  well  know  that
“Nature reduces all hills until they are essentially flat.”

Additionally, the plaintiff’s attorneys made it know to the  jury  that  the
plaintiff was an old man with only a few grandchildren left in  his  family.
It was alleged that he was terminally ill with cancer and  did  not  have  a
lot longer to live.  As a result, he wanted  to  be  able  to  pass  on  the
monetary court award (if he won) to his grandchildren as his legacy,  having
little else of value to give.

Having heard all of the  testimony,  the  jury  considered  the  plaintiff’s
demand for $35,000 plus court fees  in  damages,  deliberated  for  a  short
period of time and returned with an award in favor of the plaintiff  in  the
amount of $105,000 plus court costs!

Moral of the story: despite the ethical implications of  such  a  situation,
going to court is in reality a  crap  shoot.   Consideration  of  right  and
wrong take a back seat to the ability of each attorney to  make  convincing,
emotional appeals to the judge  and  jury  on  behalf  of  their  individual
clients.   Unfortunately,  this  reality  fosters  the  type   of    “legal”
extortion the geotechnical firm experienced in  this  case  (but  were  wise
enough to be removed for the $15,000, considerably less than the firm  would
have had to pay the plaintiff, let alone their attorneys,  had  they  stayed
in the suit and gone to court to defend themselves).

