
                          The Plagiarized Proposal
                                 (Case 1009)

The mission of the National Institute for Engineering Ethics  (NIEE)  is  to
promote ethics in engineering practice  and  education.   One  component  of
NIEE  is  the  Applied  Ethics  in  Professional  Practice  (AEPP)  program,
providing free engineering  ethics  cases  for  educational  purposes.   The
following case may be reprinted if it is provided  free  of  charge  to  the
engineer or  student.   Written  permission  is  required  if  the  case  is
reprinted for resale.  For more cases and other NIEE  Products  &  Services,
contact  the  National  Institute  for  Engineering   Ethics,   Texas   Tech
University, www.niee.org..  (All reprints must contain these statements)

The Case:
You have been  asked  to  submit  a  proposal  and  cost  estimate  for  the
foundation investigation for a proposed mid-rise condominium  at  First  and
Main Streets by a developer for whom your firm has done work  previously  at
the site of the Hillside Court project.

You go to the developer's office  to  discuss  the  scope  of  the  work  in
preparation for writing the proposal and note that in addition  to  the  red
BMW convertible and the steel gray Jaguar with gold trim parked in front  of
the one-story,  single-office  building,  the  lettered  sign  on  the  door
indicates:

Hillside Court Development, Inc.

Grandview Enterprises, Ltd.

First and Main Associates, Inc.

As you enter the building, you note that there appears to be  one  secretary
(who also acts as the receptionist) in a general office function area,  plus
two large executive offices.  At the meeting in one  of  executive  offices,
the developer, Barry Young, indicates that he is  retaining  I.  M.  Strong,
principal of Strong Engineers, as the structural engineer for  the  project.
He also states  that  due  to  the  peculiar  architectural  layout  of  the
proposed building on the site, the structural engineer will  be  responsible
for considerably more work than normal for this type of structure.   Nothing
of any substance can be done on the structural design until  the  foundation
report  is  received.   You  are  familiar  with   the   Strong   structural
engineering group, having worked with them on one or two projects  recently,
and know  that  they  have  a  good  reputation  in  the  local  engineering
community.

Young indicates that he does not know what needs to be  done  regarding  the
foundation investigation and requests that you outline  the  specific  items
in your proposal to him for  the  work.   You  return  to  your  office  and
prepare a detailed scope of work, including it  in  your  proposal  for  the
foundation investigation.   You  have  the  proposal  delivered  to  Young's
office and get on with other projects on your list of things to  do.   Three
weeks later, having heard nothing from the developer, you call to  ascertain
the status of the project.

Mr. Young apologizes for not having called you, and explains  that  he  gave
your scope of work to one of your competitors, who agreed  to  do  the  work
for the same price as your budget estimate, but  also  agreed  to  bill  the
developer for only the field work by the drilling contractor (about  25%  of
the total budget)  until  the  condominium  complex  is  completed  and  80%
occupied.  In fact, the field work  is  scheduled  to  start  in  about  two
weeks.

What, if anything, do you do?


Alternate Approaches and  Survey  Results  for  “The  Plagiarized  Proposal”
(Case 1009)
1.    Do nothing.  Walk away and don't call this  client  again.   It  is  a
    poor lesson to have to be learned; hopefully you will have enough sense
    to foresee such a situation in the future.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  0%

2.    Call Young and tell him that his actions in using the  scope  of  work
    you prepared to solicit a bid from someone else was disreputable.  Then
    walk away from the project and don't pursue it further.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  6%

3.    Call Young and explain that you really want this project, and  if  you
    had know price was that sensitive an issue, you would have  been  happy
    to match your competitor's offer, insisting that  because  it  is  your
    scope of work, you should get the project.  Also,  tell  him  that  you
    have contacted the exploration drilling contractor and can  get  a  10%
    discount on his work if the project is given to you.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  3%

4.    Write a letter to Young, telling him that  while  you  understand  his
    position, he has made a mistake.  You have worked "behind" (as a follow-
    up to) the other firm on several occasions, and have found  their  work
    to be substandard.  Encourage him  to  reconsider,  because  he  really
    doesn't want the other firm on his project, and you  would  do  a  much
    better job.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  0%

5.    You suspect your competitor actually  has  some  sort  of  affiliation
    with the developer, so you should ask around to find out who  else  may
    have received a 'bid' package from the developer.  If  your  suspicions
    are true (only your competitor received the package), contact Young and
    discuss your  suspicions.   If  there  is  no  satisfactory  conclusion
    reached, go to Alternate # 9, below.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  7%

6.    Sue the b-----d!  He (the developer) manipulated you into preparing  a
    very detailed scope of work just so he could then copy it  and  present
    it to your competitor, or give your entire proposal to your  competitor
    to use in bidding against you.  Scum like this should be run out of the
    state on a rod back to where he came from  (you  saw  the  out-of-state
    plates on the Jaguar)!
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  5%

7.    Send a letter to your competitor explaining that engineers  shall  not
    use practices that denigrate the profession or are improper, misleading
    or unfairly coerce favorable business results.   It  was  a  breach  of
    ethics to use another engineer's proposal to unfairly obtain  favorable
    business.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  10%

8.    Call your competitor and let him/her know  what  you  think  of  their
    unprofessional  behavior.   Tell  him/her  that  accepting  work  on  a
    contingency basis (getting paid only if the  project  receives  funding
    and is 80% occupied) is unethical.  Also, you will  be  happy  to  tell
    everyone you know in the local engineering community what kind of  non-
    professional they are to take your scope of work as their own!
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  0%

9.    File a complaint against your competitor for unethical  behavior  with
    the state Board of Registration  for  Professional  Engineers,  showing
    that the competitor used your work product (the detailed scope of work)
    as their own.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  25%

10.   Send a letter to Young explaining  that  he  violated  copyright  laws
    when he gave a copy of your proposal to  another  engineering  firm  to
    solicit a  'bid'.   Include  an  invoice  for  preparing  the  original
    proposal and scope of work.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  18%

11.   In the future, include a  Proprietary  Statement  with  your  proposal
    alerting  the  reader  that  the  information  in   the   proposal   is
    copyrighted.  Then sue the developer if  such  a  thing  should  happen
    again.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  18%

12.   Work with this developer  in  the  future,  recognizing  his  previous
    behavior and be prepared to deal with it.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  2%

13.   Accept the fact you are not going to work on the project, but call  I.
    M. Strong to inform him of what has transpired,  for  his  information,
    since he will be heavily involved in the project for a substantial fee.


      Percentage of votes agreeing:  6%


Forum Comments from Respondents
1.    Offering to match  your  competitor's  offer  is  the  worst  possible
    option, since it validates the developer's course of conduct.  He winds
    up saving even more money on the project, and you work  for  less  than
    cost.  Who comes out ahead?  Sometimes the most financially  beneficial
    decisions are not to do the work.

2.    Having lived in New England for a good  while,  I  realize  that  what
    goes around, comes around.  Said another way, we don't get mad, we just
    quietly get even.  We have learned  a  lesson  here,  however,  and  we
    should not forget that.  When dealing with folks that  you  don't  know
    very well, you must develop the scope (at least the written scope) very
    slowly  until  the  project  is  in  the  bag.   In  summary,  I'd   be
    circumspect, but stay tuned to what is happening on the  project.   I'm
    pretty sure there will be future opportunities.

3.    If possible, obtain a  copy  of  the  scope  of  work  given  to  your
    competitor' and compare it to yours for violation of copyright laws.

4.    Since it may have been the developer's intent from  the  beginning  to
    get you to put a detailed scope of  work  together  so  that  he  could
    peddle it to your  competitors  to  obtain  competitive  (and  cheaper)
    'bids', it is unlikely that any chastisement from you  will  have  much
    effect on future events.

5.    It is possible to  quietly  spread  the  word  about  the  developer's
    unethical behavior and that of your competitor.  Be careful to avoid  a
    lawsuit about slander.

6.    Unfortunately, you did not have  a  signed  contract  to  prepare  the
    scope of work.  While a case could be made that the developer’s request
    constituted a verbal contract for the preparation of the  proposal  and
    work scope, the monetary value of that work effort is quite small,  and
    nowhere equal to the amount you would have  to  pay  legal  counsel  to
    initiate litigation against the  developer,  let  along  the  time  and
    effort you would need to put into the case.  Current estimates of legal
    expenses for a case of this magnitude are on the order  of  $20,000  to
    carry through litigation, including a trial, and even then you may  not
    win.

7.    Filing a complaint with the  Board  of  Registration  against  another
    engineer must be backed with convincing substantiating  evidence.   All
    you have is the developer’s verbal  communication  that  he  gave  your
    scope of work to the competitor, and it is unlikely that the  developer
    is inclined  to  support  your  allegations  against  his  (now  hired)
    consultant.

8.    Your competitor now has a conflict of interest.   He  won't  get  paid
    unless the project is successfully completed.….which means  that  there
    is the potential for him to overlook or disregard a  problem  with  the
    site that might doom the project.

9.    The two fancy cars in the driveway  should  have  been  an  indication
    that the developer and  his  partner  were  used  to  maximizing  their
    personal gain on their projects; that they lived at a higher level than
    most engineers; and they liked to flaunt their apparent affluence.  The
    sign on the front  door  indicates  three  separate  corporations,  all
    operating out of the same small office facility.   As  you  opened  the
    door it should have dawned on you that  these  developers  form  a  new
    corporation for each project  they  undertake.   They  therefore  limit
    their liability to the assets of the named corporation, which  may  not
    amount to more than a desk and a chair.  As a result, if  invoices  are
    sent to the corporation from  suppliers  or  design  professionals  for
    their services, and the project fails to obtain adequate  financing  or
    is aborted for some other reason, there is nothing left  in  the  paper
    corporation to pay the invoices.  It can file for bankruptcy and not be
    obligated to pay the design professionals or suppliers.  All of this is
    legal, and by using this multiple corporation procedure, the developers
    protect their personal assets, such as the automobiles, as well.

10.   You should have recognized one of the corporations shown on the  front
    door as the name of the project your firm  had  worked  on  previously.
    Had you been prudent, you would have checked your  accounts  receivable
    file to determine if the developers had paid their invoices  in  total,
    and on time.

11.   If you had recognized the type of company the developer  operated  and
    still wanted to proceed with submitting  a  proposal,  you  might  have
    caught his attention by copyrighting the proposal, and indicating  that
    no portion of it could be duplicated or used  by  others  without  your
    written permission.  This is a  little-used  technique,  and  generally
    implies lack of trust in the prospective client, but used  selectively,
    it may be effective.

12.   A prospective client who would a)  pull  such  a  trick,  and  b)  get
    payment delayed in this  fashion  is  one  that  is  not  needed  by  a
    reputable firm.  Let them work with the bottom feeders.

13.   I'm intrigued by the low percentage of votes  received  for  informing
    the structural engineer of the situation, even though you are no longer
    involved in the project.  You do this out of a sense of  duty  for  the
    well being of other engineers with whom you have worked  and  for  whom
    you have respect.  This is a matter of applying the Golden Rule,  since
    you would appreciate being apprised of such a situation if you were  in
    the structural engineer's shoes.


Epilogue
When you went back to your accounts receivable  file  to  determine  if  the
developer had paid your firm for the  Hillcrest  Court  Development  project
which you had completed several months ago, you found  that  in  fact,  they
had not.  As a result, you found  it  necessary  to  take  legal  action  to
receive the outstanding balance due you from this previous project.

Separately, you  did  call  the  structural  engineer,  I.  M.  Strong,  who
listened to your concern that things seemed  a  bit  odd  with  the  project
(especially when an engineering consultant - your  competitor  -  agrees  to
delay getting paid for his/her work until the project  is  completely  built
and 80% occupied!).  He listened to you, thanked you for calling,  and  hung
up.

Several months later, you heard that the project failed to  obtain  adequate
financing, the paper corporation folded, your competitor did not  get  paid,
and I. M. Strong, who had stayed with the project, lost  more  than  $30,000
in unpaid engineering fees.  You are now doubly thankful that the  developer
gave your scope of work to your competitor, and a bit saddened  that  Strong
did not perceive the potential financial problems with the project that  you
tried to warn him of earlier.

