
                       WAS THAT “PIRACY” OR “PRIVACY”?
                                 (Case 1031)

The mission of the National Institute for Engineering Ethics  (NIEE)  is  to
promote ethics in engineering practice  and  education.   One  component  of
NIEE  is  the  Applied  Ethics  in  Professional  Practice  (AEPP)  program,
providing free engineering  ethics  cases  for  educational  purposes.   The
following case may be reprinted if it is provided  free  of  charge  to  the
engineer or  student.   Written  permission  is  required  if  the  case  is
reprinted for resale.  For more cases and other NIEE  Products  &  Services,
contact  the  National  Institute  for  Engineering   Ethics,   Texas   Tech
University, www.niee.org..  (All reprints must contain these statements)

The Case:
Lawrence, the managing principal of NorthLink  Consultants,  is  pleased  at
his firms’ new  information  technology  (IT)  capabilities.   Knowing  that
effective use  of  IT  offers  a  strategic  competitive  advantage  in  the
marketplace, Lawrence observes an increase in cooperation  on  projects  and
the office is using much less paper for memos and  policy  directives.   The
company web site is growing as staff, engineers and  clients  contribute  to
the site.

Lawrence, however, worries that several employees are spending an  excessive
amount of time on email.  He suspects that much of this  email  activity  is
directed at family and friends on the Internet and  outside  the  firm.   He
had reminded the employees of NorthLink’s policy which states that email  is
for company business and emails are considered part of the firm’s property.

Still, Lawrence feels that there is way too much  time  when  employees  are
emailing in inappropriate ways.  He approaches his systems  engineer,  Gwen,
with a question.  Since all the computers  are  connected  on  the  computer
network, could she access the employees’ email files  on  their  PCs?   Gwen
replies that such an examination of the files  on  the  PC  workstations  is
possible.  Her own feelings, however, are that such  an  attempt  to  "reach
out and touch" the users’ PCs would be a breach of  trust.   In  fact,  some
employees might be so offended with this  intrusion  of  privacy  that  they
would leave the firm.

Lawrence responds that company policy clearly  informs  employees  that  the
email files are the property of the firm.  They should  understand  that  it
is part of his supervisory responsibility to see that  they  use  the  email
properly.  Gwen argues that employees might  well  use  the  email  to  talk
about issues that they  do  not  want  management  to  see.   These  may  be
legitimate company  issues,  but  are  not  meant  to  be  shared  with  the
management.  Adamant in his resolve, Lawrence states (as  he  walks  out  of
Gwen’s office) that, by tomorrow evening, he expects to be  able  to  access
all of the email files on each of the PCs.

Gwen is very disturbed.  This policy will open up communications  she  feels
should be regarded  as  private  except  when  some  formal  legal  decision
requires them to be opened.  However, since it is  her  job  she  knows  she
cannot refuse to perform a technical change in the  system,  and  she  feels
she must allow Lawrence access by tomorrow evening.

Question: What should Gwen do?

NOTE:
This case  is  based  on  “Reach  Out  and  Touch  Someone”  by  the  Public
Administration at the University of Arkansas, and is used  with  permission.


Alternate  Approaches  and  Survey  Results  for  “Was  That   “Piracy”   Or
“Privacy”?” (Case 1031)
 1. Comply, willingly.   Gwen  should  do  what  she  is  told.   NorthLink
    employees  are  using  company  equipment  to   make   personal   email
    transmittals and doing so on company time, despite having been informed
    that doing so is  against  company  policy.  They  have  no  reason  to
    complain,  nor  should  Gwen  complain  or  feel  uncomfortable   about
    following her supervisor’s orders.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 10%

 2. Comply, reluctantly.  Gwen should stifle her conscience  and  abide  by
    Lawrence’s request.  She does not have the responsibility for strategic
    vision, running the company, or any other business decision, and should
    not insert herself into that process.  Lawrence is in  charge  of  this
    section and responsible for implementing company policy as it  pertains
    to IT activities.  Times are tough and she needs the job.   After  all,
    Gwen is not the one spending company time on private business.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 6%

 3. Refuse, flatly.  Gwen should refuse  to  access  the  email  files  for
    Lawrence in the manner he has requested on the basis that his action is
    unethical.  Further, she should inform Lawrence that she is prepared to
    resign if he forces the issue.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 2%

 4. Refuse, conditionally.  Gwen should refuse to access  the  email  files
    for Lawrence in the manner he has  requested  on  the  basis  that  his
    action may not be legal.  Further, she should inform Lawrence that  she
    will not access the files without express  written  approval  from  the
    human resources department, the employee union, and  the  firm's  legal
    department.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 13%

 5. Analyze, carefully.  Since she has access to the employee email  files,
    Gwen should offer to do a confidential analysis  for  Lawrence  of  the
    email files to determine the apparent volume of personal  messages,  as
    well as which employees seem to  be  using  the  system  the  most  for
    personal emails, but she will not review the nature or content  of  any
    of the messages.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 7%

 6. Document, clearly.  Gwen should help  Lawrence  put  together  a  brief
    agreement form for each employee to read and sign that  reiterates  the
    company’s policy regarding the  use  of  its  equipment  and  time  for
    personal email  communications,  and  which  clearly  states  that  the
    employee agrees that the company has the right to review employee email
    communications on a random, unannounced basis, for compliance with  the
    policy.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 28%

 7. Monitor, quietly.  Gwen should  propose  an  option  to  Lawrence  that
    instead of trying to read the emails, she  can  install  a  clandestine
    tracking system that keeps a daily log of internal and  external  email
    volume (sent and received) by individuals.  This  system  will  provide
    weekly reports of email activity to  Lawrence,  which  he  can  use  to
    manage IT resources and activities.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 13%

 8. Monitor, openly.  Gwen,  as  administrator,  should  suggest  that  she
    monitor the email of those employees who are putting the most strain on
    the email system and, if the email is not related to company  business,
    counsel them privately to cut it out or risk the  loss  of  their  job.
    Prior to setting her on this course of action, Lawrence should announce
    to the staff that, in accordance with the Company Policy, email will be
    read and individuals engaging  in  email  correspondence  unrelated  to
    Company business will be  subject  to  the  written  corrective  action
    policy   (counseling,   warning,    formal    reprimand,    suspension,
    termination).  All discipline above counseling would  be  performed  by
    Lawrence and/or his partners.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 15%

 9.  Inform,  quickly.   Gwen  should  quietly  inform  all  employees   of
    Lawrence's abrupt decision, immediately, and suggest  that  individuals
    clean out their email files so as to  not  face  Lawrence's  ire.   She
    should note the date and time of Lawrence's remarks to  her,  and,  for
    her own file only, reasons for her opposition.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 3%

10. Download, surreptitiously.   Gwen  should  realize  that  this  is  the
    perfect opportunity to see how the firm’s partners, including Lawrence,
    spend their email times.  After making sure that her own email  box  is
    clean as a whistle, she should make a copy of each manager’s inbox  for
    perusal later, since you never know when this type of information might
    come in handy.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 2%


Forum Comments from Respondents
 1. Comply, but it will not work and Lawrence will need to come up with  an
    alternative.  Gwen will do her job, and ultimately, Lawrence  will  NOT
    be satisfied.  People will use other accounts like Yahoo, HotMail, MSN,
    and so on.  People will  only  use  the  company  account  for  related
    business; however, they will continue to use the network  for  personal
    business.

 2. Similar to monitor openly, Gwen should do what Lawrence asks her to but
    only after informing all employees about the change in structure of the
    system. The goal is to make sure that employees aren't comitting "theft
    of payroll funds" by using time inappropriately.  In response to Gwen's
    privacy concerns, a system should be set up in which the employees  can
    communicate to one another via emails specially marked as ones  not  to
    be viewed by  management.  A  non-management  employee  (perhaps  Gwen)
    should be given the authority to monitor these emails.


 3. Combine Approach 6 and 8.   First,  the  managing  director  should  be
    counseled regarding the ethical and  legal  aspects  of  his  decision.
    Specifically, he should understand that  the  review  and  disciplinary
    process  must  ensure  the  equal  treatment  of  similarly  positioned
    employees - if a star performer and a weak performer are both found  to
    have abused the email system, the managing director must be prepared to
    treat the employees in a similar fashion to  avoid  a  lawsuit  by  the
    poorly performing employee. (Of course, that information might diminish
    his desire to review  the  emails.)   Second,  if  employees  have  not
    already signed an acknowledgement that they have read and agreed to the
    employee policies (including a clear statement of policy, including the
    company's right to review employee email communications  on  a  random,
    unannounced basis, and the consequences of breaching the policy),  then
    a signed acknowledgement should be obtained  in  order  to  help  avoid
    misunderstanding or  miscommunications.    If  employees  have  already
    signed such an acknowledgement (often done at the time  of  hire)  then
    that step appears to be  unnecessary.   However,  there  should  be  an
    announcement that the review process has begun, who is involved in  the
    process, how confidentiality is being protected,  and  that  the  email
    review will be prospective only.  As for  the  process  of  review,  an
    employee in a position of trust (perhaps the director of  HR  or  legal
    counsel) should guide the process.   Given  Gwen's  concerns  with  the
    directive, she might not be in  the  best  position  to  adequately  or
    properly manage the process.  All discipline above counseling would  be
    performed by Lawrence and/or his partners;  however,  accurate  records
    should be kept of the disciplinary process and the  reasons  supporting
    the actions taken against an employee.


Comments from Board of Review Members

 1. Whether or not the company has a "right" to review the email, doing  so
    will generate  a  huge  moral  and  morale  problem  within  the  firm,
    regardless of what information would  be  revealed.  Employees  have  a
    right to some privacy, and this is a  change  in  company  policy  that
    supercedes this right. Until now, the company has not  performed  email
    monitoring, nor stated it  would.  To  institute  this  policy  without
    warning is not appropriate. Gwen should try explaining this to Lawrence
    again  (and  other  Partners),  with  an  admonishment  to  notify  the
    employees in advance of instituting this spying.  She  should  let  him
    know that he is opening himself, and the company, up  to  lawsuits  and
    loss of good employees who will not tolerate this kind of behavior.

 2. One key consideration is the sensitivity of the content of  the  emails
    even  if  they  are  all  relevant  company  business.    Inappropriate
    disclosure (even  to  Lawrence)  of  personnel  decisions  could  cause
    serious (and unnecessary) personal and/or  professional  embarrassment.
    For example, I am aware that  the  Department  of  Defense  (DoD)  does
    routinely screen emails sent through DoD email systems.  They also have
    monitoring programs that automatically compile  and  report  visits  to
    "inappropriate" internet web sites.  The most common inappropriate type
    of site is  pornography,  but  that  is  not  the  only  type  of  site
    prohibited.  Service members have been tried and convicted of  computer
    crimes based on their emails and website visitation histories.

 3. A very interesting question; we are addressing it at our firm right now
    but on a slightly larger scale.  Our firm is networked  with  T1  lines
    between all offices and high-speed internet access from every  desktop.
    Recently our MIS Manager noticed  that  the  server  hard  drives  were
    becoming filled up, which was surprising given their size and  previous
    company history of hard drive capacity utilization.  He checked and, lo
    and behold, there were gigabytes of totally  inappropriate  files  that
    had been downloaded and saved to the company’s servers.  Virtually  all
    of them were of a nature that would cause  legal  difficulties  of  one
    type or another (either with owners of  intellectual  property  or,  in
    some cases, with law enforcement personnel).  After conferring with our
    Chief Operating Officer, he did a file wipe with no prior  notification
    to those who had saved those files.  At the next  “all  hands”  company
    conference call, the announcement was made that our MIS  Manager  would
    be using  his  Network  Administrator  technical  capabilities  to,  1)
    identify who was embezzling company property (paid  “on-the-job”  time,
    PLUS bandwidth, PLUS file space) in this fashion, and 2) forward a copy
    of the offending file (including date, time, duration of time on  line,
    and identity of the employee who did the download) to our CEO, who will
    not tolerate such activity.  How does this story relate  to  your  case
    history?  In several ways.  First, diversion  of  company  property  to
    employee personal use is theft.  This includes the  time  the  employee
    spends conducting personal business when they are at work.   Consulting
    firms like mine sell their time to their clients; clients would not pay
    for time used by a consultant’s employees who were taking  a  nap  when
    they were supposedly conducting a field investigation.  This  situation
    is equivalent. Second, the problem is larger than simple  inappropriate
    email use.  Chat rooms  and  internet  browsing  are  highly  addictive
    activities.  Employees  who  are  not  being  properly  supervised  can
    literally spend hours in this fashion.  Third, downloaded  files  offer
    the added risk of  exposing  the  firm  to  significant  adverse  legal
    liability (“If you did not know that our intellectual property had been
    pirated and was resident on your server, you should have known and  I’m
    sure the court will agree.”).

 4. Gwen is obviously sensitive  to  the  employee’s  side  of  the  issue.
    Lawrence should recognize that sensitivity and  suggest  a  compromise.
    Gwen, as administrator, should monitor the email of those employees who
    are putting the most strain on the email system and, if  the  email  is
    NOT related to company business, counsel them privately to cut  it  out
    or risk the loss of their job.  Prior to setting her on this course  of
    action, Lawrence should announce to the staff that, in accordance  with
    the Company Policy, email will be  read  and  individuals  engaging  in
    email correspondence unrelated to Company business will be  subject  to
    the written  corrective  action  policy  (counseling,  warning,  formal
    reprimand, suspension, termination).  All discipline  above  counseling
    would be performed by Lawrence and/or his partners.

 5. When I worked as a consultant, my company, I  believe,  had  a  similar
    policy to NorthLink’s. However, I don't ever  recall  being  explicitly
    informed about it; the policy was just something you assumed  was  "out
    there," and  I  don't  recall  it  ever  being  talked  about.   To  my
    knowledge, the issue of invasion of employee privacy was never  raised,
    probably  because  we  had  reason  to  believe  that  management   was
    monitoring email, even though they never talked about it.

 6. An interesting case, indeed. My company's policy is  pretty  much  like
    NorthLink's. We have the capability to monitor email but we  rarely  do
    it.  That is, we only monitor email if there is some evidence  that  it
    is being abused. We have a number of firewalls that  prevent  employees
    from visiting inappropriate sites, and we have not had  any  complaints
    about intruding into people's personal lives.

 7. Gwen has two choices: (1) do what she  is  instructed  to  do,  or  (2)
    resign her position.  Little would be gained  by  resigning  since  the
    next system engineers will be required to provide  the  information  so
    the privacy of the employees  would  still  be  breached.   Gwen  might
    request a 30-day delay in carrying out  the  instructions  so  she  can
    check with the firm’s legal counsel to  verify  that  no  statues  were
    being violated and also investigate what other firms  are  doing.   She
    might also suggest that she review  the  emails  (instead  of  Lawrence
    reviewing), and she would talk with those who are violating the  firm’s
    policy.  She might also suggest that it would be better not  to  review
    past emails, but rather publish a notice that all emails henceforth are
    subject to review by management.  The best  procedure  would  have  all
    employees sign an acknowledgement of the policy.   Very  likely  Gwen’s
    suggestions will fall on deaf ears.  In that case  she  should  proceed
    carrying out Lawrence’s instructions.

 8. This is a most difficult case.  It is one that our firm  has  addressed
    in the past and we use a "signed acknowledgement" of the review policy.
     It should be noted that management has the responsibility to see  that
    emails are used  appropriately.    Several  lawsuits  have  been  filed
    against firms due to inappropriate use of email.  Also,  emails  should
    not be used to convey messages that the sender does not want management
    to see.



