

      In-Line Engineering – A Study in Creative Corporate Financing[1]
                            (Case 1036 - Part 1)

The mission of the National Institute for Engineering Ethics  (NIEE)  is  to
promote ethics in engineering practice  and  education.   One  component  of
NIEE  is  the  Applied  Ethics  in  Professional  Practice  (AEPP)  program,
providing free engineering  ethics  cases  for  educational  purposes.   The
following case may be reprinted if it is provided  free  of  charge  to  the
engineer or  student.   Written  permission  is  required  if  the  case  is
reprinted for resale.  For more cases and other NIEE  Products  &  Services,
contact  the  National  Institute  for  Engineering   Ethics,   Texas   Tech
University, www.niee.org..  (All reprints must contain these statements)

The Case:
In-Line Engineering has been in business in  the  Midwestern  United  States
now for over 30 years.  The firm has succeeded by being the “big frog” in  a
relatively small pond, a city of 50,000 located 130  to  160  miles  distant
from the two nearest larger cities.  The metropolitan  area  served  by  In-
Line Engineering has a population of  about  250,000  scattered  across  300
square miles.

The company founder and to this point, sole owner,  is  Mr.  Sam  Sliderule,
PE.  Now 68 years old, Sam’s doctor has advised him that he is in the  early
stages of congestive heart failure and that he has to slow down or  he  will
be slowed down.

In-Line Engineering occupies one office and employs  a  staff  of  about  20
persons.  In addition to Sam, there  are  two  other  licensed  PEs,  Calvin
“Cal” Culator, who is about 45, and Maxmillian  “Max”  Profit,  who  is  35.
The firm has three EITs, a licensed surveyor, three drafters,  two  4-person
survey crews, a receptionist, and a bookkeeper (Mrs. Sliderule).

Desperate to retire by age 69, Sam decided three years  ago  that  the  only
way to get his equity out of the business was to sell to his employees,  and
he began doing that by using an Employee Stock Ownership  Plan  (ESOP).   In
the past 12 months, Sam has brought Cal, Max and his surveyor in for  larger
shares, leveraging their purchases by using their  bonus  dollars  to  allow
them to buy shares essentially tax free.

In-Line has definitely operated as a small business, with the  personalities
of the key players dominating the firm.  For the  past  35  years,  Sam  has
been the boss, answering to nobody but Mrs. Sliderule,  and  he  has  gotten
used to keeping the details of the business in his head.   If  this  were  a
poker game, Sam would be letting nobody see his cards.

Cal is an easy-going sort, happy to immerse  himself  in  project  work  and
with little interest in running a business.  Max, on the other  hand,  is  a
“hard-charger” with a burning urge to get ahead.  He would like  to  be  the
boss, even though he is somewhat lacking in experience,  management  skills,
and some of the finer points of client relations.  Max and Cal both  put  in
about 50 hours Monday through Friday, but  Max  also  is  in  the  habit  of
spending several hours at the office each weekend.

Recently, a ripple of unease has  disturbed  the  tranquility  of  In-Line’s
pond.  A competitor, FBN Engineering  Services,  has  opened  an  office  in
town!  FBN has a reputation as being a  “bottom-feeder,”  low-balling  their
up-front estimates and making up the difference on  change  orders  –  which
seem to occur on every project, as if by magic.  In the 60  days  since  FBN
opened its office, In-Line’s backlog has dropped by  20  percent.   Sam  can
easily foresee disaster, a postponed retirement, and an early death  in  his
future.  Max is equally disturbed, since he has recently been  spending  his
weekends hacking his way into the In-Line’s electronic “books,”  and  in  so
doing he has learned all the  details  of  how  Sam  has  been  running  the
business – or, running it into the ground, in Max’s opinion.

Another sixty days has now passed, and In-Line’s backlog is at  an  all-time
low.  New projects are coming in the door at a rate equal to 25  percent  of
the projects being completed.  Sam and Max, in  their  own  ways,  are  both
aware that financial disaster is imminent.   One  bright  Saturday  morning,
Max is surprised to find Sam in the office, and they  start  to  talk  about
the business.  It soon becomes clear to Sam that Max knows far more than  he
should about the true state of affairs at In-Line, but  as  they  talk,  Sam
begins to understand that this is not  all  bad.   Finally,  Sam  has  found
somebody he can confide in.

For his part, Max is elated that Sam is in a frame of mind where he  appears
ready to attempt some “unconventional” measures to stave off ruin.   Seizing
this opportunity, Max outlines his plan to save In-Line Engineering:

Step 1 is to find  a  “white  knight”  that  can  neutralize  FBN’s  growing
stranglehold on the local market.  It so happens that Max has  a  friend  at
FBN’s arch-rival, Nemesis Engineering, and  he  knows  that  Nemesis  has  a
policy of letting FBN do their market research, then  moving  into  an  area
that FBN has staked out.  Sam shudders as he considers  the  impact  on  his
clients if he sells In-Line Engineering to Nemesis, but he is desperate  for
options and is willing to consider just about anything.


Step 2 is to make In-Line Engineering look as prosperous and  profitable  as
it can possibly be made to appear, this so Sam and Max can convince  Nemesis
to purchase the firm.  This way, Sam can escape to retirement, and Max  will
become the boss of the new  branch  office.   There  might  even  be  a  few
dollars that will fall into the pockets of Cal and  the  other  participants
in the ESOP, in addition to everybody keeping their job, which is  no  small
consideration.

As the day lengthens into evening, Max and Sam come up with a list of  items
that they shape into a “transition plan” to make  In-Line  Engineering  look
its best.  The plan includes the following options:

    ▪ Sam, as the trustee, is to “raid” the ESOP for operations cash.

    ▪ Employee health insurance is to be quietly cancelled.

    ▪  The  errors  and  omissions  (E&O)  insurance  payment   is   to   be
      “suspended.”

    ▪ Employees are  to  be  notified  that  “exempt”  personnel  get  a  25
      percent cut in pay and “hourly” personnel can only report  when  there
      is billable work for them.

    ▪ Every hour the “exempt” employees are not  doing  billable  work  must
      be used for making calls on current and former  clients,  asking  them
      for both new projects as well as “job well done” letters. They are  to
      explain that the letters are for referrals  for  marketing  the  firm,
      when in actuality the letters are for  making  In-Line  look  good  to
      Nemesis.

    ▪ Each new job brought in is to be “booked” into the  backlog  at  twice
      to three times the actual contract amount.  Actual contracts are to be
      taken home by Sam, while the office files are to be filled with  cost-
      inflated “dummy” contracts bearing signature page photocopies.

    ▪ Payments  to  subcontractors  and  vendors  will  be  put  on  a  slow
      schedule, with no payments to occur in  the  last  60  days  prior  to
      selling the firm.

    ▪ If worst comes to worst, the last month before signing on  the  dotted
      line with Nemesis will include “neglecting” to pay  Uncle  Sam  either
      the employees’ or employer’s share of Social  Security,  so  there  is
      cash to meet the payroll.

    ▪ No one but Max, Sam, and Mrs. Sliderule is to know what  is  going  on
      until the deal with Nemesis is completed. In particular, Max  cautions
      that Cal should be kept in the dark since he is a “by  the  book”  guy
      and has often been quick to express doubts whenever Max has  suggested
      a  questionable  (what  Max  terms  “creative”)  approach  to  problem
      solving.

Max and Sam each head to their respective homes  at  day’s  end,  and  Sam’s
head is fairly spinning with all that just happened.   Later  that  evening,
after a good meal  with  Mrs.  Sliderule,  Sam  once  more  looks  over  the
transition plan.  He cannot help but hesitate.  This  is  all  happening  so
quickly, and certain aspects of the transition plan  are  quite  unpleasant,
even though Sam can clearly see based on Max’s projections that all  of  the
components seem necessary to keep In-Line Engineering from  financial  ruin.
Plus, once the deal goes through with Nemesis, it  seems  very  likely  that
everything will turn out better for everyone involved.

What should Sam do?

Alternate Approaches and Survey Results

Results
The following tables summarize the  online  survey  responses  received  for
this case.  Table 1 presents data relative to whether the described  actions
are legal.   Table  2  presents  data  relative  to  whether  the  described
actions are ethical.

Table 1.  Perceived Legality of Possible Actions to Keep In-Line
Engineering from Financial Ruin, Percentage of Respondents Agreeing, Ranked
by Weighted Average
|Item   |Possible Action to Keep|Perceived Legality of Action             |Weighted |Standard |
|       |In-Line Engineering    |Percentage of Respondents (Note 1)       |Average  |Deviation|
|       |from Financial Ruin    |                                         |(Note 2) |         |
|                                                                                           |
|Note 2. The weighting scale is from 1 to 5, as follows: 5- Strongly Agree, 4- Agree, 3-    |
|Neutral, 2- Disagree, 1- Strongly Disagree.                                                |

Table 2.  Perceived Ethicality of Possible Actions to Keep In-Line
Engineering from Financial Ruin, Percentage of Respondents Agreeing, Ranked
by Weighted Average
|Item   |Possible Action to Keep|Perceived Ethicality of Action           |Weighted |Standard |
|       |In-Line Engineering    |Percentage of Respondents (Note 1)       |Average  |Deviation|
|       |from Financial Ruin    |                                         |(Note 2) |         |
|                                                                                           |
|Note 2. The weighting scale is from 1 to 5, as follows: 5- Strongly Agree, 4- Agree, 3-    |
|Neutral, 2- Disagree, 1- Strongly Disagree.                                                |

Respondent data  in  both  tables  are  ranked  by  weighted  average,  from
greatest to least  perceived  legality  (Table  1)  and  greatest  to  least
perceived ethicality (Table 2).   It  is  important  to  remember  that  the
respondent  pool  is  a  convenience  sample  and   is   not   statistically
representative of any particular group.  Respondent  comments  suggest  that
most  respondents  are  engineering  practitioners,  and  some   engineering
students.

Several observations  can  be  made  from  these  data.   First,  respondent
opinions about legality and ethicality vary  across  all  of  the  potential
actions that Sam might consider.  That is, almost every item shows  a  range
of responses from strongly agree to strongly disagree.  This is not  to  say
that responses are not clustered, but the  range  is  surprising.    If  Sam
were to approach ethics by polling public  opinion,  he  could  hear  pretty
much what he wanted to hear depending on who he listened to.

Second, respondents deemed that most of the potential  actions  are  illegal
(6 of 10 items average below 3.0/5.0) and almost all of the potential  items
are unethical (8 of 10 items average below 3.0/5.0).  Clearly Sam is  facing
some hard and difficult choices, but the  data  suggest  that  he  would  be
crossing the line were he to  go  forward  with  most  of  these  particular
actions.

Third, respondent opinions about what is legal (Can  Sam  do  this?)  versus
what is ethical (Should Sam do this?)  differ.   On  the  one  hand,  it  is
hardly surprising  to  encounter  another  illustration  of  the  difference
between “legal” and  “ethical.”   However,  the  fact  that  differences  in
respondent  opinion  exist  across  all  action  items,   and   that   sharp
differences of opinion exist for some action items, is striking.


To Be Continued…
Differences between how respondents viewed the legality  and  ethicality  of
Sam’s potential actions, plus much more information about  this  case,  will
be analyzed and discussed in detail in Part 2 of this case study.
-----------------------
[1] All names have been changed to protect the guilty; any similarity to
any actual engineering firm, living or dead, is purely a coincidence.

