
                           The Peter/Paul Dilemma
                                 (Case 1005)

The mission of the National Institute for Engineering Ethics  (NIEE)  is  to
promote ethics in engineering practice  and  education.   One  component  of
NIEE  is  the  Applied  Ethics  in  Professional  Practice  (AEPP)  program,
providing free engineering  ethics  cases  for  educational  purposes.   The
following case may be reprinted if it is provided  free  of  charge  to  the
engineer or  student.   Written  permission  is  required  if  the  case  is
reprinted for resale.  For more cases and other NIEE  Products  &  Services,
contact  the  National  Institute  for  Engineering   Ethics,   Texas   Tech
University, www.niee.org..  (All reprints must contain these statements)

The Case:
You are an engineer for a well-respected  consulting  firm.   The  firm  has
been very successful in the past, but recently business has slowed down  due
to a slump in the local and regional economy.

One of the projects being handled by the internal design  group  with  which
you work is for Excaliber Resorts, Inc., a  reputable  company  which  deals
with  the  development  of  expensive,  world   class   destination   resort
properties, including all of the roadway design,  drainage  and  site  civil
work.  The  estimated  construction  cost  of  the  project  your  group  is
currently working on is in excess of $90  million,  and  this  is  only  the
first of several proposed phases.  The project is going well.  In fact,  the
work for this initial phase of the overall development is ahead of  schedule
and well within the budget.

Since the engineering work on the Excaliber project  is  slowing  down,  you
and part of your group are assigned another project to work on at  the  same
time.  Unfortunately this new project for  Wellfleet  Corporation  has  been
hanging around the office for several  months,  since  the  project  manager
went on vacation alone to Fiji, then  was  sued  for  divorce  by  his  wife
immediately after returning.

As a result, a lot of time has been charged to the job  and  billed  to  the
client, but very little has been accomplished.  While the deadline  for  the
Wellfleet project is still well into the future, it  is  estimated  that  at
least 50% more  money  is  needed  to  complete  the  design  properly  than
actually remains in the contract budget.   Neither  the  Excaliber  nor  the
Wellfleet project has a lump sum  contract.   Each  is  being  billed  using
standard hourly multiplier rates.

You and the other members  of  your  design  group  are  told  by  the  Vice
President for Operations of your firm that since you are officially  working
on both projects,  the  majority  of  your  time  should  be  spent  on  the
Wellfleet project,  but  your  time  should  be  charged  to  the  Excaliber
project, since there is more than enough left in that budget to  finish  the
job.   The  Vice  President  also  indicates  that  s/he   will   take   the
responsibility for these decisions.

What do you do?

Alternate Approaches and Survey Results for “The Peter/Paul  Dilemma”  (Case
1005)
1.    Follow  the  Vice  President’s  directions.   After  all,  you  are  a
    subordinate, and  are  supposed  to  do  what  you  are  told  by  your
    superiors, especially the Vice President.  If you don’t,  your  loyalty
    to the company  may  be  suspect  and  you  may  jeopardize  your  job.
    Besides,  the  Vice  President  assured  you  that   s/he   will   take
    responsibility for this action.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  2%

2.     Ask  the  Vice  President  for  a  written  confirmation  of  her/his
    instructions and her/his assumption of the responsibility involved  for
    such action.  Also see if there is a policy covering the  situation  in
    the company’s operations or personnel manual.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  7%

3.    Do not do as the Vice President directed (i.e., do not post your  time
    for one project to a different project).  Say nothing and hope that the
    Vice President does not notice.  However, keep copies  of  your  signed
    time sheets for possible future reference.  If the Vice President  does
    notice and wants to change your time sheet, it is out of your hands.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  8%

4.    Ask for the advice of one or more engineers you  know  personally  who
    are working for other firms in the area to determine what the  accepted
    standard of practice is in situations such as this.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  4%

5.    Approach the Vice President and indicate that you cannot  do  as  s/he
    directed, since it is a breach  of  honesty,  fidelity  to  the  client
    (which  supersedes  fidelity   to   the   firm   in   this   instance),
    responsibility (accountability) and professional integrity.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  10%

6.    Approach the Vice President (as in ‘5’ above), and suggest  a  way  to
    rectify the situation, such as  having  the  original  project  manager
    shoulder his rightful responsibility to get the project back on  track,
    even if it means he has to work nights and weekends without pay.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  21%

7.    Discuss the situation with the others in your team who are being  told
    to do the same thing, so that you can approach the Vice President  with
    the same reasoning as in ‘5’ above as a unified group.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  10%

8.    Discuss the situation with the others in your team, as in  ‘7’  above,
    but also offer the Vice President alternatives, such as each member  of
    the team donating a few hours a week to the project without pay  (after
    hours/weekends) to assist the original project  manager  in  trying  to
    rectify the situation, if all of you (or even some of you) agree to  do
    so.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  34%

9.    Spruce up your resume and start looking for another job.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  4%

Forum Comments from Respondents
1.    This happens  more  often  than  we  like  to  admit.   One  effective
    approach is to point out to the Vice President that once you sign  your
    time sheet, it is a legal document.  Your signature is affirmation that
    the information shown  is  truthful.  Should  a  close  review  of  the
    projects occur and it became apparent that you had falsified your  time
    sheets, you  are  personally  responsible  and  liable,  not  the  Vice
    President.  At such a time it would be your reputation and your  future
    swirling down the drain.  It is  highly  unlikely  the  Vice  President
    would admit requiring you to do what you did.

2.    This practice appears to be  widespread.   It  might  be  argued  that
    provided the contracted scope  of  work  actually  gets  done,  by  the
    deadline and to the satisfaction  of  the  client,  then  there  is  no
    problem ultimately.  However, this is deceit, and therefore  unethical.
    If no work has been done, then it should not be charged for.  Any audit
    would show discrepancies which could lead to legal action!

3.    Most contracts for engineering services at an hourly  rate  grant  the
    client the right to audit the financial records for the project.   Some
    clients have been "skinned" before  Although both projects  are  at  an
    hourly rate which leads to  a  false  sense  of  an  unlimited  budget,
    somewhere, someone in the client's organization has a sense of  what  a
    fair fee would  be  for  the  services.   When  that  budget  level  is
    exceeded, a dissatisfied client results and future  business  is  lost.
    If you discover that it is common practice for your company  to  charge
    time in this fashion, put your resume in order and begin  to  look  for
    work with more reputable firms.

4.    In our firm the time is charged to the correct project.  Each  monthly
    invoice notes the upset limit and the total billed therefore  does  not
    exceed this amount.  The firm must accept the financial loss and go on.
     It is not ethical to charge one client for work done for another.

5.    This situation is probably more common than  we  like  to  think.   It
    happened early on in my employment with a state transportation  agency.
    As I still work for that agency, you  can  see  I  followed  the  pack.
    Luckily, a change in management has  allowed  us  to  charge  our  time
    ethically and properly.

6.    The most favored solution must include options to  which  the  VP  may
    respond.  In addition, the VP should know that  options  are  presented
    based on professional  and  business  ethics,  and  not  based  on  the
    unwillingness of the employee to share  in  the  burden.  Finally,  the
    burden of accountability should  be  shared  by  the  previous  project
    manager  to  assure  that  history  doesn't  repeat  itself  with  that
    individual or set a precedent in the organization.

7.    Clients are not a dime  a  dozen.    They  are  people;  they  deserve
    respect; but its gotta start somewhere.  When an action occurs, someone
    surely should be held accountable for the consequences.  Good  or  bad,
    it's time for the vacationer to pay for the vacation.  If  teamwork  is
    valued, everyone should help out, but project  managers  have  to  know
    prior to taking an assignment that they are  responsible  for  the  end
    result.

8.    I think you need to give the VP some alternatives if you can, but  I'm
    not sure I agree that all of the team  members  should  "donate"  their
    time.

9.    I agree that the core values of honesty and fidelity are paramount  in
    this situation.  I don't agree that it's a question of fidelity to  the
    client over fidelity to the firm.  Often we forget that fidelity to our
    employer means to the entity, not our supervisor.  The firm is not well
    served by dishonest, possibly criminal, behavior which  could  severely
    damage the firm's reputation and risk losing a major client.  If the VP
    doesn't respond, then this is a case where it's  perfectly  appropriate
    to go over his/her head.

10.   Go over your Vice President's head and discuss the situation and  your
    discomfort with it with his superior.

11.   Try to discuss the situation with the VP's boss  and  see  if  he  has
    been instructed to do this by his boss.  If this  is  the  case,  start
    looking for another job.

12.   It is the  consultant's  requirement  to  the  client  to  report  all
    charges fairly and accurately.  One of the projects may be funded by  a
    different agency.  During a closing audit the data may reveal errors in
    charging  which  will  negatively  affect  the  reputability  of   both
    consultant and client.

13.   Do as  you're  told,  but  keep  documentation  regarding  the  actual
    accounting of your time in case you need it in your defense later.

14.   Make  a  personal  documentation  of  the  discussion  with  the  Vice
    President.  Also, if the Vice President presses the  issue,  refuse  to
    sign your timecard for the reason of not wanting your  signature  on  a
    document that is falsely representing the number of  hours  worked  and
    leave the billing to the discretion of the supervisor.   Although  this
    is  still  a  gray  area,  you  have  presented  and  documented   your
    disagreement  with  the  decision  and  cleared  your  name  from  this
    decision.  (College senior)

15.   Approach the Vice President and indicate that you cannot  do  as  s/he
    directed, since it is a breach  of  honesty,  fidelity  to  the  client
    (which  supercedes  fidelity   to   the   firm   in   this   instance),
    responsibility (accountability) and  professional  integrity.   Suggest
    ways to solve the situation which don't place the burden on people  who
    were not responsible.  The original  project  manager  should  be  held
    responsible but placing the whole thing on him may not be practical  or
    possible.  The next level of responsibility rests on  the  managers  of
    that project manager, who should have been aware of what was happening.
      Ultimately,  the  burden  needs  to  rest  on  the  people  who  were
    responsible and the company as  a  whole.   Since  the  size  of  these
    projects are so large, and the money involved so much, it  may  not  be
    feasible for individuals to take much of the burden.   Such  being  the
    case, it appears that the company you work for should use some  of  its
    own earnings to cover the losses that occur due to its  bad  management
    practices.  If the Vice President is  not  willing  to  act  ethnically
    [sic], then you may have to go  to  higher  authorities,  such  as  the
    President of your company, national ASCE, or even other  companies  who
    are being cheated.  (College student)

16.   Since the VP was not able to think of [an ethical way  to  handle  the
    situation], he should not be a VP to begin with,  so  please  have  him
    step down and find a replacement.  (College senior)

17.   I would ask for the advice of senior engineers that I know  personally
    to determine what the accepted standard of practice  is  in  situations
    such as this.  Furthermore I would also offer the senior engineer in my
    design group (or my immediate supervisor) to donate some extra hours  a
    week to get the project back on the track.  (College senior)

18.   The client needs to know what happened and be part of the  resolution.
     There is potential liability involved here and  I  would  contact  the
    firm's lawyer for advice.  Not only is there  an  ethical  breach,  but
    potential fraud and civil liability.  It is much more than an  in-house
    problem.  The right thing to do is get all relevant parties involved in
    the decision making process.

19.   I think that consulting with others on the team and presenting both  a
    unified approach and alternatives [to the VP] provides  better  support
    for resolution of the ethical dilemma.  However, if the VP stands  firm
    for his or her decision, it  is  important  that  the  VP  take  formal
    responsibility for the decision, particularly because the  action  will
    breach ethical obligations to the client(s).

20.   Conduct a project risk analysis to determine the critical elements  of
    the remaining work scope for cost  reduction  and  for  validating  the
    estimated 50%  overrun;  apply  quality  management  process  to  avoid
    rework; eliminate tasks  that  do  not  add  value;  utilize  different
    personnel and technology  to  maximize  efficiency;  and  determine  if
    additional services have been performed  to  approach  client  for  fee
    supplement.  Review possible (ethical) cost  recovery  with  follow  up
    contract services with client (i.e., construction  phase).   Prepare  a
    report of findings, conclusions, and recommendations to Vice President.
     Meet with client for possible win-win solutions.

21.   We were once in a joint venture with a firm that tried to  initiate  a
    move like this.  We terminated the joint venture, which cost us  a  lot
    of money, but retained our honesty and pride.

22.   Fill out your time record in accordance with  the  time  you  actually
    spent and keep a record of your charges.  If the VP wants to cheat, let
    him change the records.  Of course. If I find out he  changed  my  time
    sheet, I might be compelled to write him a letter with  my  resignation
    and send a carbon copy to his client!

