
                                Holey Smoke!!
                                 (Case 1026)

The mission of the National Institute for Engineering Ethics  (NIEE)  is  to
promote ethics in engineering practice  and  education.   One  component  of
NIEE  is  the  Applied  Ethics  in  Professional  Practice  (AEPP)  program,
providing free engineering  ethics  cases  for  educational  purposes.   The
following case may be reprinted if it is provided  free  of  charge  to  the
engineer or  student.   Written  permission  is  required  if  the  case  is
reprinted for resale.  For more cases and other NIEE  Products  &  Services,
contact  the  National  Institute  for  Engineering   Ethics,   Texas   Tech
University, www.niee.org..  (All reprints must contain these statements)

The Case:
Three years  ago,  Jack  Florin  was  promoted  to  the  position  of  chief
geotechnical  engineer  of  Welk  Consultants,  a  geotechnical  engineering
consulting firm located in Fargo, North Dakota, after having been  with  the
firm for more than 18 years.  Welk Consultants is a  full  service  firm  in
geotechnical engineering, maintaining  several  drilling  rigs,  experienced
drilling crews and geologists, as well as a laboratory.   The  drilling  and
sampling operations are overseen by  the  firm’s  drilling  manager,  Ernest
Downholt.

In  his  capacity  as  chief  geotechnical  engineer,   Jack   has   written
professional engineering reports that  provide  design  parameters  for  the
foundations of over a hundred structures, with projects ranging  from  small
commercial buildings to large grain elevators.  In the conduct of his  work,
Jack must rely on the data gathered by the firm’s drilling and boring  crews
and geologists, often spread  over  a  territory  covering  several  hundred
miles of eastern North Dakota.  As a check,  Jack  occasionally  visits  the
project sites while the drillers and geologist are at work, but  because  of
an increased work load and other personnel management  responsibilities,  he
is normally in the office writing reports  and  overseeing  the  work  of  a
number of younger engineers.

Realizing that he has not been in the field much recently, Jack  decides  to
visit the site of a  large  proposed  three-story  office  building  complex
approximately 60 miles from the firm’s office.   With  the  boring  logs  of
most of the 18 planned subsurface explorations provided by the firm's  drill
crew and geologist in hand, he discovers upon arrival at the site  that  the
drill rig and crew have come and gone.  Jack looks for signs of the  borings
on the site but can find none.

Jack contacts Ernest Downholt by cellular telephone  and  arranges  to  meet
him the following morning at the site.  When Ernest arrives in  the  morning
he also searches in vain for evidence of the  borings,  and  in  desperation
points to what are obviously prairie  dog  mounds,  claiming  they  are  the
remains of the drilling operation.

The accuracy of the subsurface exploration logs and data  given  to  him  by
the drill crew is critical to Jack’s analyses  and  design  recommendations.
It is now Friday morning, and the foundation  design  recommendation  report
is due in the client's office by Thursday of the following  week,  six  days
from now.

What should he do?


Alternate Approaches and Survey Results for “Holey Smoke!!” (Case 1026)

1.    Jack should not be that concerned.  The soil conditions  in  the  area
    of the project are not that variable, so looking at  boring  logs  from
    other sites in the area should suffice  to  provide  enough  subsurface
    data for design purposes,  especially  if  he  uses  very  conservative
    assumptions for design and construction.  Nonetheless, he  should  talk
    to Ernest and tell him in no uncertain terms that this  situation  with
    the drillers and geologist is not to be allowed again.   In  this  way,
    Jack can meet his report deadline with the client, and prevent  similar
    occurrences in the future.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 1%

2.    Jack should call the geologist who was supposed to  be  on  the  site,
    give him a piece of his mind in no uncertain  terms,  and  demand  that
    they (the geologist and the drillers) prove that the borings were  done
    at the proper site and that the  boring  logs  submitted  are  actually
    based on soil samples recovered at the site boring locations.   If  the
    geologist and drillers cannot do that to Jack’s satisfaction  within  a
    day, Jack should fire the entire crew.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 4%

3.     Jack  should  fire   Ernest   Downholt,   since   it   was   Ernest’s
    responsibility to oversee the drilling  operations  and  he  apparently
    failed to do so, or was in cahoots with the drillers and geologist.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 1%

4.    Jack should have Ernest contact the geologist or head of the  drilling
    team to meet him at the site  the  following  day  and  point  out  the
    locations of the borings.  It is possible that Jack and Ernest were  at
    the wrong site; it is possible that the geologists and drillers drilled
    at the wrong site; it is possible  that  the  geologists  and  drillers
    didn’t drill at all, but manufactured the boring logs  based  on  their
    experience in the area.  If it turns out that Jack and Ernest  were  at
    the correct  site  and  the  geologist  cannot  show  them  the  boring
    locations, Jack should require lie detector tests for  Ernest  Downholt
    and the members of the drilling and boring crew.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 1%

6.    Be upfront with the client.  Tell them what you  have  discovered  (or
    think you may have discovered) and ask for additional time to  complete
    the report.  Your honesty will convince the client of  your  obligation
    to complete the job correctly.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 18%

7.    Reschedule duplicate drilling with another crew at the correct site
    for the next available time, call the client and tell them that the
    data collected was inconclusive and additional boring and sampling is
    essential for an informed and reliable report.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 5%

8.    Reschedule duplicate drilling with another crew at the correct site
     for the next available time, call the client and tell them that the
     drill crew was unavoidably detained and the report will be several days
     late.  This is much better than not communicating with the client at
     all, and should not be a problem, since Jack has worked with the client
     many times in the past.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 4%

9.    Require the geologists and drillers to go back to the correct site
     immediately, work over the weekend and have the field boring layout
     plan, boring logs and soil samples back in the office for Jack to go
     over while they are still there on Monday morning.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 10%

10.   Require the geologists and drillers to go back to the correct site
     immediately, work over the weekend and have the field boring layout
     plan, boring logs and soil samples back in the office for Jack to go
     over while they are still there on Monday morning.  He should also
     require that all of this work be done without pay to the geologist and
     drillers.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 5%

11.   Require the geologists and drillers to go back to the correct site
     immediately, work over the weekend and have the field boring layout
     plan, boring logs and soil samples back in the office for Jack to go
     over while they are still there on Monday morning.  He should also
     require that all of this work be done without pay to the geologist and
     drillers, and they should also pay for the truck and car expenses
     involved in going back to the site, as well as for the motel and meal
     expenses for staying overnight in the area of the site to finish the
     work by Sunday evening.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 1%

12.   Require the geologists and drillers to go back to the correct site
     immediately, work over the weekend and have the field boring layout
     plan, boring logs and soil samples back in the office for Jack to go
     over while they are still there on Monday morning. He should also
     require that Ernest Downholt accompany the drilling crew and geologist
     and stay with them on the site until the work is completed.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 21%

13.   Require the geologists and drillers to go back to the correct site
     immediately, work over the weekend and have the field boring layout
     plan, boring logs and soil samples back in the office for Jack to go
     over while they are still there on Monday morning. He should also
     require that Ernest Downholt accompany the drilling crew and geologist
     and stay with them on the site until the work is completed.  In
     addition he should require that all of this work be done without pay to
     the geologist and drillers, and they should also pay for the truck and
     car expenses involved in going back to the site, as well as for the
     motel and meal expenses for staying overnight in the area of the site
     to finish the work by Sunday evening.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 11%

14.   After obtaining the correct information for the site from the
     geologist and drillers, Jack should have Ernest Downholt fire the
     geologist and drillers, since they can never be trusted again and the
     legal liability implications to the firm are tremendous if design
     recommendations are based on erroneous or false information, which
     could cause damage to the finished project, or injury or death.  He
     should also remind Ernest that it is his responsibility to oversee the
     field crews, and if this type of situation should ever arise in the
     future, Ernest will be out of a job and down the road in the blink of
     an eye.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 19%


Forum Comments from Respondents

Comments received primarily from students:
1.    Jack should immediately talk to the drilling crew and geologic  group.
     They  should  show  the  exact  locations  of  the  boring  holes  and
    sufficient evidence (ed. note – of what?).  If Jack believes the  group
    (ed. note – just the geologic group?  How about the drillers?) is  just
    putting together information after this, he  should  bring  in  another
    group and contact his client and tell them what he  believes  may  have
    happened.  Jack should ask for an extension and make  sure  things  are
    done right, by having Ernest call from on-sight throughout the  weekend
    with no additional pay (ed. note – who to receive no additional  pay?).
    After all, Ernest did not adequately do his job.  In many companies  he
    may be required to provide a urine analysis for his mishap.

2.    Depending on the soil type, ground cover, etc., completed borings  can
    be incredible easy to miss, especially if it has rained.  Some  borings
    produce hardly any cuttings.  In  his  presumed  anger,  Jack  must  be
    careful not to accuse anyone of fraud, which is exactly what  he  would
    have to do in order to get the entire drill crew back out to  work  the
    weekend.  Forcing them to pay fore their time would really be  inviting
    trouble.  A little detective work (separately  interrogating  the  crew
    members, etc.) might uncover what really took  place,  but  there’s  no
    time, so Jack is best off  hiring  a  local  subcontractor  to  do  the
    drilling and informing the client that the  report  will  be  a  little
    late.

3.    Inform the client  and  proceed  to  get  valid  data  as  quickly  as
    possible, at his firm’s expense (ed. note – whose firm?).   Inform  any
    clients whose foundations were based on unreliable data and remedy  the
    situation at his firm’s expense (ed. note – multiple  clients  for  the
    site in question? Previous clients and previous  sites?  What  type  of
    remedy is contemplated?).  Fire Ernest Downholt, the geologists and the
    drillers as untrustworthy.  Inform appropriate  regulatory  authorities
    of the problem and corrective action (ed. note – which authorities?).

4.    It’s possible that Ernest didn’t give the orders to do  the  job.   In
    that case he should be fired and someone else should supervise the team
    to get the work done (ed. note – if this is true,  why  fire  Ernest?).
    If it doesn’t get done on time, then the client should be warned  about
    the problem.  If Ernest did give the orders but the team didn’t do  the
    job, then the team should get to work right away and  in  the  meantime
    find out the reasons why the job wasn’t done (ed. note –  who  to  find
    out why the job wasn’t done?).  Ernest should be demoted and Jack (with
    a new supervisor) will take charge.  The  team  may  or  not  be  fired
    [sic].

Comments received from practicing engineers:
5.    If the drillers faked the borings, first find out why they  felt  they
    needed to cut corners.  Was Ernie putting undue  pressure  on  them  to
    produce?  If there is a company policy in place against faking data and
    it says one strike and you are out, consider sacking them on the  spot.
    Nevertheless consider that word will get around pretty quickly and  the
    drillers would need to move away to get  a  new  job.   This  could  be
    pretty rough on them.  Consider rehabilitation.  If there is no policy,
    Jack will have to provide a warning that if this  sort  of  thing  ever
    happens again, the drillers will be sacked.
            Also, tell the client the truth and ask for sufficient  time  to
    do the holes.  Preferably have the drill foreman go with Jack to a face
    to face meeting with the client to personally apologize.  This sort  of
    apology will help in the long run.

6.    Obviously this is a situation  that  threatens  the  survival  of  the
    firm, so Jack must divorce himself from every other aspect of his work.
     He must communicate the seriousness of the  problem  first  to  Ernest
    Downholt, emphasizing that it may well cost both of them their jobs and
    careers if not  properly  handled  (putting  Ernest,  as  the  drilling
    supervisor, in the position of choosing between his loyalty to his wife
    and children and his loyalty to a drilling crew which may have put  him
    in this position).  Then Jack must immediately inform the principals in
    the firm that something is  seriously  amiss  and  alert  them  to  the
    gravity of the situation.
            Next he must  visit  the  firm’s  lab  and  examine  the  “drill
    samples” that the drillers brought  in  for  examination  and  testing.
    There is no need to alert the lab technicians that there  is  something
    unusual about this request.  He must also interview the geologist  that
    laid out the borings in the field  and  who  presumably  was  with  the
    drillers in the course of their work, laying the same  choice  on  this
    person as he did on Ernest.
            Armed with this information, Jack should bring  the  drill  crew
    and rig back to the project site the next morning, telling  them  there
    is a need to confirm something unusual that was found in one or two  of
    the borings.  He should then have the crew set up adjacent to Bore Hole
    #9 and drill a duplicate boring while he and Ernest and  the  geologist
    stand there, watch and he personally collects the samples  and  records
    the blow counts.  His notes should be recorded on a copy of the  boring
    log originally submitted for Bore Hole #9 that he has on his clipboard.
     If, as suspected, there is a serious discrepancy between Bore Hole #9A
    and Bore Hole #9, he should move the crew to Bore Hole #145 and  repeat
    the process.  In the event of a duplication of the serious discrepancy,
    he should ask them for an explanation.  He should interview the driller
    in his truck and Ernest should interview the helper in the other truck.
     He and Ernest should then compare notes.   If  the  crew  admits  they
    rigged the job, they should be allowed to resign  from  the  firm.   If
    they persist in their dishonesty, Jack should fire them on the spot for
    incompetence, falsification of company records (the boring  logs),  and
    suspicion of timesheet fraud, collect the keys to  their  vehicles  and
    the office, and let them walk home.
            Jack should then pull in two other drill crews to the site,  and
    have them finish the other 16  borings.   These  two  crews  should  be
    offered overtime pay to start early, work late  and  finish  the  field
    portion of  the  job.   Ernest,  the  drilling  supervisor,  should  be
    delegated to stay at the site 16 hours a day until the  field  work  is
    done (if he had been paying attention in the first  place,  this  would
    never have happened).  Everyone,  including  the  geologist  should  be
    required to work  overtime,  nights  and  the  weekend  to  finish  the
    borings, lab testing and their  portions  of  the  report.   After  the
    report is finished, Jack should have a post-mortem with the  principals
    in the firm (within an hour of sending the report out the  door),  then
    an all-hands meeting to clear the air.  The job  may  be  a  dead  loss
    financially, but the company would be preserved.

7.    My initial response to this case is to scream.   This  type  of  thing
    happened to me with a traffic counting crew in an eastern US state many
    years ago.  A field crew can become so knowledgeable  of  the  patterns
    associated with traffic that they think they can  make  (dry  lab)  the
    data.  With regard to the drilling  crew  in  the  case  history,  they
    thought it won’t make any difference  because  the  soil  is  good  and
    probably just like it was at a nearby location.  The soils map from the
    USGS shows that it is the same soil and layer structure as another job,
    so why not fake the soil borings and get another part time job.  In  my
    traffic counting incident, members of the  traffic  counting  crew  had
    other jobs during the day: bartenders and school bus drivers!  This  is
    frightening!

8.    Ethically Jack should cause or encourage  complete,  clear,  accurate,
    objective, truthful and timely communications  between  themselves  and
    the client regarding the services sought and  rendered.   The  same  is
    true between the engineer and his  employees.   Complete  communication
    means the engineer provides sufficient information so that  the  client
    is appraised of the costs, problems, hazards  and  opinions.   Complete
    communication also requires sufficient information,  facts,  materials,
    etc. so  the  client  will  not  be  reasonably  led  to  a  fallacious
    conclusion, can  act  in  an  informed  manner  and  has  knowledge  of
    pertinent matters.  Truthful communication means  the  engineer  should
    provide a realistic and honest appraisal of the situation relying on  a
    reasonable application of the engineer’s knowledge,  skill,  experience
    and education founded upon information  and  evidence  normally  relied
    upon by similarly situated engineers.  Accordingly,  Jack  must  either
    gather the necessary data to complete the services by the  agreed  upon
    time or inform the client the time limit will not  be  met.   Either  a
    modification of the contract must be  made  or  damages  paid  for  the
    breach.

9.    Jack Florin has no choice.  He is ethically bound not to proceed  with
    the report.  He might also be in violation of the law and certainly the
    rules and regulations of the state  engineering  licensing  board.   He
    should  discuss  the  situation  with  his  supervisor.   Assuming  the
    superior shares Florin’s concern, they should immediately  conduct  the
    borings, and endeavor  to  complete  the  report  within  the  original
    schedule.  If the assignment cannot be completed within  the  schedule,
    they should so inform the client, who  hopefully,  will  grant  a  time
    extension.  Regardless of  whether  the  report  can  be  submitted  on
    schedule or the client does  not  grant  a  time  extension,  under  no
    circumstances should the report be submitted without proper borings.
            In  the  unlikely  event  the  supervisor  instructs  Florin  to
    prepare a report based on the original  information  submitted  by  the
    driller, Florin should refuse even if it  jeopardizes  his  employment.
    If Welk Consultants submits a report  (without  Florin’s  involvement),
    Florin should report the fact to the proper authorities.   Very  likely
    Florin should also begin to seek new employment.

10.   Jack calls his brother, Myron, who owns a drilling  firm  of  his  own
    and ask if he could do a “rush” job for him, noting that it would be  a
    24-hours-a-day assignment and that he needs 18 borings completed in the
    next 72 hours.
            Myron says, “Shuur thing, but I need a helper.”
            Jack says, “That’s OK.  I have a fellow here  at  the  site  who
    has at least one day of vacation left and seeing that this  is  Friday,
    I’m sure he is available for the next 72 hours.  Ernest is already here
    at the site and will have the holes staked out by the time you get here
    with the rig.”
            Jack goes back to the office, and  advises  Jimmy,  the  project
    engineer, of the situation and that he will need to really “crunch  the
    analysis and report on Monday.”  Jimmy says, “That’s OK, Jack.  I  have
    rounded up the lab data from several local projects on that side of the
    Red  River  and  we’ve  got  a  good  handle   on   the   consolidation
    characteristics of the soils in the area.  If we have the logs  of  the
    on-site borings and the site topo  mapping,  we  can  pull  the  report
    together by Tuesday evening.”
            Jack calls Ernest on his cell phone and says, “Ernest,  I  think
    we are all set as long as you and Myron can get the logs to the  office
    fist thing Monday morning and that you have laid off your drill crew by
    4:30 PM today.  If you can’t get this done, I’ll recommend to  Lawrence
    that he fire both you and your drill crew on  Monday  morning.   Please
    give me an update at 3:30 PM Sunday.   I’ll  be  watching  the  Vikings
    game.”

11.   Everyone needs to be in sync with where the site  is.   If  the  drill
    crew is fabricating information, this is criminal  (fraud).   Jack  and
    Ernest should immediately call the geologist.  They should explain that
    they wanted to see the site are trying to find the boring locations  ad
    ask for descriptions of where the borings were located.  If they  still
    can'’ find them, they should come back to the site with  the  geologist
    and have him show them the locations.  They should also  take  a  close
    look at the samples collected and see if  the  samples  are  consistent
    with the expected subsurface conditions in that area.
            If the borings were  completed,  and  simply  completed  on  the
    wrong site, Jack should call the client  immediately  and  explain  the
    situation, and that he will do whatever he can to get the report  done,
    but it might be a little late.  If the borings were not completed,  the
    geologist  and  drill  crew  should  be  placed   on   some   kind   of
    administrative leave until the company can determine the extent of  the
    problem.  Clearly the individuals involved should no longer be employed
    by the firm, but more importantly, how many past projects are affected?
     Should the firm “come clean” with all past clients that may have  been
    cheated?  Or, hope nobody ever finds out?
            The company must come clean.   They  should  send  a  letter  to
    every client they feel could have been affected and  explain  what  has
    happened, what actions they have taken, what they intend to do to  make
    restitution, and, how they can assure that it will  not  happen  again.
    They could argue that the design recommendations are probably  suitable
    anyway; they could suggest a  “forensic”  investigation  at  their  own
    expense to confirm the design recommendations were appropriate, or they
    could offer to reimburse all or part of the fees paid especially  those
    associated with the drilling costs they didn’t in fact incur).
            Perhaps the “cleanest” solution at the outset is to conduct  the
    forensic investigations at their own expense, and hope  like  hell  the
    soils are OK.  And they should pray they have understanding clients who
    won’t hold it against them in the future!
            Additionally, the employees at fault may be  criminally  liable.
    The  firm  should  discuss  the  merits  of  suing  them  for  damages,
    reimbursement of salary and expense not earned, etc., and see if  there
    is anything at all they can reclaim from the disaster.

12.   I had a similar situation happen to me when I  worked  as  a  not-yet-
    licensed (staff) geotechnical engineer.  In that  case,  our  own,  in-
    house drill crew actually drilled the borings,  but  claimed  they  got
    poor (no) sample recovery in a marly  limestone  and  thus  took  field
    penetration tests.  But I learned that while it was true they got  poor
    sample recovery, they did NOT take some of the penetration tests;  they
    merely fabricated the penetration test data on the field logs.  I would
    not have learned this had not one of our geologists  visited  the  site
    unexpectedly and checked the boring logs (which  showed  a  penetration
    test had just been done) when in fact he knew this  had  not  happened.
    The geologist reported this to me and I reported  it  to  the  licensed
    PE/office manager.
            I was furious!   I  told  the  boss  that  my  bearing  capacity
    calculations and foundation recommendations were based on that data.  I
    could not, in good conscious, write a report based on fabricated  data.
    Although I did not attempt to tell my boss what to do, he clearly  knew
    how displeased I was.  Angry and frustrated as I was, I was inclined to
    fire the entire drill crew.  At a  minimum,  I  would  have  fired  the
    driller.
            My boss took a less  strident  position.   Perhaps  he  felt  he
    didn’t have enough evidence to fire the driller.  Also it  so  happened
    that we had a backlog of projects which had to be  drilled,  and  being
    concerned not to create major delays for the rest of our  clients,  the
    boss took the following approach: He called the driller (not the  crew)
    in to the office the next day (brief meeting at the end of  the  day  –
    not a special inquisition) and in  my  presence  told  the  driller  in
    abstract terms that it was very important  to  obtain  accurate  boring
    data, and this included field penetration tests.  He explained that the
    foundation design depended on the data  but  he  did  not  mention  any
    specific case of fabrication (such as the one the geologist came upon).
     The gist of the conversation was an unspoken but implied “don’t let it
    happen again” or “don’t let me catch you fabricating data.”  As for me,
    after the driller left the boss told me that  in  the  first  place,  I
    should realize that drill crews sometimes fabricate data and  I  should
    take all field penetration data with a grain of salt, and apply  safety
    factors accordingly.  He said that’s just the way things are.  He  also
    told me to do the best I could with the analysis and he would  look  it
    all over, but that we would not re-drill the site.
            I requested a transfer to another  office  shortly  after  that.
    At the new office we only used contract drillers and had a policy  that
    one of our professionals (geologist or an engineer)  must  be  on  site
    with the drill crew to log all borings.

