
                          Long Distance Operator(s)
                                 (Case 1028)


The mission of the National Institute for Engineering Ethics  (NIEE)  is  to
promote ethics in engineering practice  and  education.   One  component  of
NIEE  is  the  Applied  Ethics  in  Professional  Practice  (AEPP)  program,
providing free engineering  ethics  cases  for  educational  purposes.   The
following case may be reprinted if it is provided  free  of  charge  to  the
engineer or  student.   Written  permission  is  required  if  the  case  is
reprinted for resale.  For more cases and other NIEE  Products  &  Services,
contact  the  National  Institute  for  Engineering   Ethics,   Texas   Tech
University, www.niee.org..  (All reprints must contain these statements)

The Case:
You work for a medium-sized  consulting  firm  that  offers  services  in  a
relatively specialized area of the  A/E  (Architectural/Engineering)  design
industry.  Most of your clients  are  municipalities,  counties,  state  and
federal agencies, in  addition  to  large-scale  commercial  and  industrial
developers.  Because your projects  are  usually  some  distance  from  your
office, it is not unusual for you to spend a considerable amount of time  on
the telephone communicating with the client who is  often  headquartered  in
another state or region of the country, as well  as  other  members  of  the
design team, and regulatory agencies.  The long distance  telephone  charges
for these calls can accumulate to an appreciable amount over the  course  of
a project.

As mundane as it may seem, one of the sticky problems you encounter all  the
time is how to bill  your  clients  for  “out-of-pocket”  or  “reimbursable”
expenses.  Almost all of the clients insist that these  expenses  be  passed
on to them at actual cost,  without  a  mark-up  for  your  associated  real
overhead costs.  These overhead costs include business  taxes,  professional
liability insurance based on your gross (total) billings, and  the  cost  of
financing from the time the costs are incurred to the time reimbursement  is
received from the client (often  three,  four  or  more  months  after  they
receive your invoice).

Several years ago, your firm, along with  approximately  120  other  similar
firms across the country, decided to form  a  professional  organization  to
provide assistance to its members focused on the business  aspects  of  your
professional practice (a topic often not covered to any  extent  in  college
or graduate school).   The  name  of  the  organization  is  the  Associated
Services Society, and its executive director is I. B. Wiley, a man  who  has
had several years of experience dealing with the business and  legal  issues
commonly encountered in your area of practice.

As a service to the Society’s members, I. B. Wiley periodically  distributes
information regarding ways in which to avoid legal problems, tips  for  good
accounting practice, and  other  helpful  hints  for  running  an  efficient
company.   You have recently received the following memo from the Society:




   MEMORANDUM

   August 28, 2002

   To: All Associated Service Society Member Firms

   From: I. B. Wiley, Executive Director

   Reference: Long Distance Telephone Charges

   As you may know, we here at the  Society  headquarters  in  Pebble  Beach
   switched our long distance telephone service to  Creative  Communications
   Corporation, a national communications provider, more  than  three  years
   ago.  Because of our close association with CCC, they are now offering  a
   unique service that should be of great  interest  to  each  of  you.   No
   longer will you have to stress over recouping overhead  costs  associated
   with the long distance telephone charges passed on to your clients.

   CCC’s service allows you to receive your monthly long distance  telephone
   bill from CCC with a client-by-client or  project-by-project  accounting,
   thereby saving considerable clerical effort at billing time  when  it  is
   necessary to accumulate, list and invoice long distance charges.  Of even
   greater importance, CCC can send you two telephone bills,  if  you  wish.
   One of them is the ‘normal’ bill.  The other bill  includes  an  internal
   markup based on a percentage of your  choosing,  project  by  project  or
   client by client.  You are then able  to  send  a  copy  of  this  second
   telephone bill to your clients as backup for the charges  shown  on  your
   invoice to them.   All  you  need  do  is  notify  CCC  of  the  specific
   percentage to be added to calls for individual clients or  projects  when
   you initiate your own internal project accounting.

   No longer will you have to lose money on these  long  distance  telephone
   charges.  In fact, you can even turn a profit on your telephones!   Other
   Society members using this service are excited and pleased.  Be  sure  to
   call our office to sign up for this plan and learn how you too can charge
   your clients the telephone rates that you personally select.  Be your own
   utility, for a change!




What, if anything, do you do?



Alternate Approaches and Survey Results for “Long Distance Operator(s)”
(Case 1028)
1.  This is a great  deal,  call  and  sign  up!   Whether  a  surcharge  is
   included on long distance telephone calls is as much your decision as the
   client’s.  There is nothing wrong with having the telephone service (CCC)
   perform the surcharge function, and it saves you the  clerical  time  and
   expense to do it with your personnel.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  1%

2.  Sign up  for  the  CCC  telephone  service.   You  certainly  have  real
   overhead costs and by not passing these costs along to your clients,  you
   deprive your employees and stockholders of  revenue  that  is  rightfully
   theirs.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  1%

3.  This program obviously has the approval of the  professional  Associated
   Services Society, of which your firm is a member.  You  should  therefore
   sign up for it, since it appears that everyone else in the  society  will
   be doing the same thing.  Also, it is unreasonable that your firm  should
   give your professional competitors an advantage by their collecting these
   costs through the CCC program while you do not.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  1%

4. Sign up for it - this is a great program which gives you the  opportunity
   to even the playing field.  The real advantage to  this  CCC  program  is
   that you are able to set the surcharge rates for  each  of  your  clients
   individually.  This allows you to charge greater surcharge percentages to
   those clients who  are  chronically  late  paying  your  invoices  and/or
   complain time and again about the charges for your professional services.


      Percentage of votes agreeing:  1%

5.  Sign up for the CCC telephone service, but inform your clients that  you
   use this firm to  handle  your  telephone  service  and  billing.   Leave
   disclosure of CCC’s business practices and judgment of your choice  of  a
   telephone service provider up to your clients.   This  is  in  accordance
   with the widespread doctrine of “caveat emptor” – buyer beware.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  11%

6.  At the next meeting of the Associated Services Society,  pass  a  motion
   to give 10% of all of the  additional  revenue  collected  by  each  firm
   participating in the CCC program to the Executive Director of the Society
   on a yearly basis as a reward for his creative initiative, and  encourage
   him to find other similar ways of recouping lost overhead costs.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  0%

7.  You do not need hidden schemes to make your  business  profitable.   You
   have the option of rejecting a contract with a client who refuses to  pay
   you a reasonable overhead surcharge for long distance  communications  in
   accordance with the provisions of your standard contract form.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  15%

8.   The  way  to  substantially  avoid  being  involved  in  lawsuits   and
   litigation  brought  on  by  a  client  is  to  make  certain  that   the
   communications between your firm and the client are open and there are no
   hidden agendas in the performance of  your  work.   If  you  want  to  be
   reimbursed for the overhead costs associated with long distance telephone
   charges, as well as overhead costs  connected  with  other  out-of-pocket
   expenses for  a  project,  you  should  be  willing  to  negotiate  these
   reimbursement rates directly with your client at the time your  formalize
   your contract for the services your firm  will  provide  for  a  specific
   project.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  36%

9.  What goes around, comes around.  If you nickel and dime your  client  by
   hiding overhead surcharges for  long  distance  telephone  communications
   without telling them, it is likely your client will find one or more ways
   to cause your firm a loss of  revenue  when  they  find  out  about  your
   surcharge practice.  This may be by withholding payment of your  invoices
   for a substantial period of time, thereby making it  necessary  for  your
   firm to borrow funds at  a  substantial  interest  rate  from  a  lending
   institution to cover your payroll, insurance and rent.  You may think you
   are winning the battle, but are actually losing the war.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  7%

10.  This practice is plainly dishonest and unethical.  You do not  wish  to
   have  you  and  your  firm’s   professional   reputation   tarnished   by
   participating in such a program, and it should not take a  brain  surgeon
   to figure that out.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  15%

11.  You should refuse to participate in the program  since  it  is  clearly
   dishonest and unethical, and you should bring the issue to the  Board  of
   Directors of the Associated Service Society, demanding they reprimand the
   Executive Director and inform the rest of the  Society  member  firms  of
   their position and action.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  12%


Forum Comments from Respondents

1. Use the service within your contract agreement and  negotiated  surcharge
   if applicable.  The ability to assign a project to the telephone call  is
   a critical time-saving part of business.  Not telling the customer  about
   the markup is unethical.

2. This is unethical. It is not part of  an  engineering  practice  to  make
   profits off telephone bills. It is reasonable to  charge  the  client  in
   order to pay for most, if not all, of the long distance  charges.  It  is
   not reasonable to make profit from the charges, especially  by  lying  to
   clients about phone bills.

3. It should not be necessary to hide  charges.   You  should  be  open  and
   honest with a client who is obviously trusting your work, your  judgment,
   and you.

4. I wouldn't have this problem as the overhead charges would  have  already
   been hidden in the invoice somewhere else.... gas/food/lodging whatever.

5. As we have seen with Enron, Tyco, and  others,  hiding  costs  will  come
   back to get you.  I think it is  perfectly  reasonable  to  contract  the
   costs of telephone and travel expenses.  As long as you and  your  client
   agree on the terms, everyone is happy, and no ethics have  been  violated
   as such.  Hiding the markup is the problem here.

6. Dishonesty (failure to provide true, complete  information  for  personal
   gain or aggressive intent) is a fine path to trouble. The services of CCC
   would be a convenient method for transacting with a firm that is aware of
   and has agreed to the markup that will be occurring in the phone  charges
   but this is obviously not the  intent  of  Director  Wiley.   Assuming  I
   respect Wiley as a colleague (though I think that something by this  time
   would have tipped me off to his unfortunate character and  I  would  have
   politely excused myself from his association), I would take  two  actions
   in this situation. The actual order of these two actions depends  on  the
   degree of influence I hold with the man. Given a fair amount of  personal
   influence, I would give my own opinion to him before bringing the  matter
   to the attention of an appropriate governing board (whom I assume to be a
   fair and ethical body). Given  a  small  chance  for  having  a  personal
   influence, I would inform the board as  quickly  as  possible  and  then,
   letting them know my intent, express my concern to Wiley in some sort  of
   confidential communication.   My  communication  to  Wiley  would  be  by
   confidential letter or memo, informing him of the action I had  taken  or
   will take. If possible I would try to avoid personally offending the man,
   and only explain my understanding of the unethical nature of his business
   practices.

7. In my work as an intern for an engineering company, I  noticed  that  our
   firm did all of the overhead billing in-house, and charged the client for
   it.  So I don’t see any problem with allowing a contract firm to  do  the
   overhead billing, if that is your preference.

8. I feel open communication is the way to solve every issue, and  that  the
   CCC may choose for themselves if they need to stop this practice or  not.



9. Perhaps I am over simplifying this, but it appears  obvious  to  me  that
   CCC is offering a convenient service with their billing  by  project  and
   that adding a hidden percentage is entirely optional.  If indeed they can
   perform the  billing  as  they  say,  go  with  them.   Even  without  an
   additional percentage, this should reduce your overhead by allowing  your
   company to allocate fewer resources to billing.  If you can be  up  front
   in explaining the need for an extra percentage to your clients  then  you
   now have an easy way of billing that extra amount.  The other question is
   what to do on the society level  since  it  could  appear  that  you  are
   supporting less than honest behavior.  You don't  want  that  reputation,
   and you don't want to be a part of a society that encourages  it.   I  am
   still undecided on how to handle that situation; perhaps it would be best
   to suggest the  above  plan  and  recommend  that  others  use  the  same
   approach.

10. Refuse to participate in the program.  It  is  obviously  unethical  and
   very dishonest.  This concern should  be  brought  to  the  attention  of
   Executive Director Wiley, to give him a chance to see what he  is  doing.
   If this is unsuccessful, then the engineering licensure board  should  be
   notified.

11. It is best to discuss overhead charges to the client beforehand so  that
   the matter can be agreed upon and there are no surprises to either party.
    In the long run your clients will come to appreciate  your  honesty  and
   charity.

12. Sign up for the program, but do not use the surcharge option.  Use  only
   the benefit of listing the client-by-client and project-by-project calls.
    This will save time, and therefore money, and it  is  not  imposing  any
   hidden surcharges on the client.

13. Review any contracts with the customer. If  there  are  none  that  this
   billing method would violate then inform the customer that you intend  to
   profit on all costs and services you supply. Then use the new method.  If
   your clients really wished for you not to incur the  charges  they  could
   supply your firm with a calling card.

14. Sign up for the program, but do not use the second bill  feature.   Your
   clients will be able to trust your billing because  CCC  was  responsible
   for it, and you may gain their trust.  In return you may have  an  easier
   time billing them for overhead.



Comments from Board of Review Members

1.  Ethics require fair dealing and truthful communications to  the  client.
A firm’s ability to negotiate and come to an agreement with  the  client  to
cover  the  firm’s  costs  should  not  be  overcome  by  deceitful  billing
practices.

2.  While all other services you provide have  associated  surcharges,  your
firm’s accounting department handles that business with the  client.   Since
you will be hiring  a  telephone  service  specifically  to  circumvent  the
scrutiny  of  your  client,  you  are  being  inherently  deceitful.    Such
deception is inappropriate for your business, and  if  your  actions  become
public knowledge, you could possibly lose future business  revenues  greater
than the telephone surcharge could ever generate.

3. CCC’s service of providing itemized billing  reports  is  terrific.   You
   can easily track charges to specific clients and  projects.   You  should
   definitely consider signing on for that part of the service.  Now,  about
   that automatic and hidden mark-up part….Not so cool.  If you’ve lost  the
   backbone to negotiate fairly with your clients,  you  can’t  go  sneaking
   around and hiding what you do.  That would ultimately lead to a  complete
   breakdown in the integrity column.  Either grow a backbone and work  with
   your clients to get a fair rate for reimbursable expenses, or accept  the
   bare  bones  of  recovering  your  actual  per  call  costs  without  the
   associated overhead and go on.  You could also consider  moving  to  lump
   sum type pricing structures where you can in fact recoup  many  of  those
   costs.
