
                           An Engineering Exorcise
                                 (Case 1011)

The mission of the National Institute for Engineering Ethics  (NIEE)  is  to
promote ethics in engineering practice  and  education.   One  component  of
NIEE  is  the  Applied  Ethics  in  Professional  Practice  (AEPP)  program,
providing free engineering  ethics  cases  for  educational  purposes.   The
following case may be reprinted if it is provided  free  of  charge  to  the
engineer or  student.   Written  permission  is  required  if  the  case  is
reprinted for resale.  For more cases and other NIEE  Products  &  Services,
contact  the  National  Institute  for  Engineering   Ethics,   Texas   Tech
University, www.niee.org..  (All reprints must contain these statements)

The Case:
A substantial commercial/industrial  development  is  planned  for  a  large
tract of land on the edge of town where an old peat  bog  once  existed  and
was  subsequently  filled.   Since  it  is  of  such  a  magnitude,   Ramrod
Enterprises, the  developer/owner,  has  had  to  make  numerous  submittals
before the town's zoning and planning commissions, and there has been a  lot
of coverage of the project in the local newspaper.  Most of the town  is  in
support of the proposed development, since it will greatly enhance  the  tax
base and provide approximately 125 new jobs.

The  planning  commission  has  required  the  developer   to   complete   a
preliminary report of the  project  for  their  review  and  comment  before
starting final design.  The preliminary  report  was  submitted  four  weeks
ago, including a number of recommendations and  comments  from  one  of  the
developer's consultants, Weeks and Weeks, who is a competitor of yours.   In
fact, you were a bit put out when you did  not  get  the  contract  for  the
preliminary engineering design report, since  you  had  done  three  similar
projects in the past two years, and were familiar  with  the  conditions  at
the proposed site.

John Bigge, the president of Ramrod Enterprises, called you yesterday  about
4:15 p.m. to ask if you would be willing to do the final engineering  design
for the project.  He indicated that some of the preliminary  recommendations
made by Weeks and Weeks were unrealistic, and that was  also  recognized  by
the planning commission in their review of the  preliminary  submittal.   He
would like to go forward with an engineering firm  who  is  well  known  and
respected in the community.  That is why he is contacting you.

What do you tell him?

Alternate Approaches and Survey Results for “An Engineering Exorcise”  (Case
1011)
1.    Tell Bigge how pleased you are that he contacted  you  and  set  up  a
    meeting with him to discuss the project, so you can define the scope of
    work and prepare a proposal.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 5%

2.    Ask Bigge if he  had  considered  retaining  your  firm  initially  to
    review the reasonableness of Weeks  and  Weeks  recommendations  before
    deciding to shift the project to another design firm.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 2%

3.    Offer to meet with Bigge, on a no-charge basis, to make a  preliminary
    review of Weeks and Weeks recommendations to see if you find them to be
    reasonable considering what you know of the site conditions.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 9%

4.    Accept the assignment.  Your competitor obviously  did  not  have  the
    experience or expertise to make  appropriate  recommendations  for  the
    preliminary engineering design of the project and that  was  recognized
    by the  planning  commission.   Since  your  firm  is  well  known  and
    respected in the community, and  you  do  have  experience  with  three
    similar projects as well as being familiar with the conditions  at  the
    site, your firm is the ideal one to step in  immediately  and  get  the
    project back on track.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 4%

5.    Ask the developer if your competitor has been  released  from  his/her
    contractual obligations for the project.  If not,  tell  the  developer
    that you cannot take over from an incumbent engineer  until  they  have
    been released from their involvement in  the  project.   Once  that  is
    accomplished, then you will accept the assignment.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 25%

6.     Before  accepting  the  assignment,  obtain  a  copy  of  the   other
    engineer’s report from the developer for your review.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 8%

7.     Accept  the  assignment,  provided  the  developer  gives   you   the
    opportunity to submit a proposal to provide engineering field  services
    during construction.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 2%

8.    Call the other engineer to a) verify their release from  the  project,
    b) let them know you have been asked  to  step  into  the  project,  c)
    determine what in their  recommendations  was  not  acceptable  to  the
    developer,  d)  determine  what  in  their  recommendations   was   not
    acceptable to the planning commission, and e) ask about their  business
    relationship with the developer.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 15%

9.    Accept the assignment, provided that the developer allows you to  (and
    pays you to) evaluate the recommendations made by Weeks and Weeks based
    on your experience and professional judgement.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 2%

10.   Accept the assignment, provided that the developer allows you to  (and
    pays you to) evaluate the recommendations made by Weeks and Weeks based
    on your experience and professional judgement,  and  provided  that  he
    understands and agrees that you may have to do additional work  on  the
    preliminary report recommendations, including engineering analyses  and
    possibly additional field investigations.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 12%

11.   Contact the chair of the planning commission to  briefly  discuss  the
    project and its present status.  Determine if the story relayed to  you
    by the developer is accurate regarding the  engineer  who  you  are  to
    replace  and  what  was  “unrealistic”  about  their   recommendations.
    Determine the time schedule for the project and any constraints as  far
    as the planning commission is concerned.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 16%


Forum Comments from Respondents
1.    Because the original design contract is between Weeks  and  Weeks  and
    the developer (Ramrod), you have no obligation to secure a  release  of
    the  contact.   Good  public  relations  would  require  some  type  of
    communications notifying Weeks and Weeks of your present involvement.

2.    Accepting the assignment prior to  the  release  of  Weeks  and  Weeks
    would have the effect of injuring their professional reputation.

3.     Referencing  the  1984  Vermont  court  decision  in   Williams   vs.
    Chittendon Trust Co., you cannot rely sole on the word of  Bigge.   You
    must be sure that his contractual relationship with Weeks and Weeks has
    been terminated.

4.     Be  careful.   Find   out   more   about   what   those   unrealistic
    recommendations were.  Find out how Weeks  and  Weeks  was  treated  by
    Bigge (from both Bigge and weeks).  I don't think I would take on final
    design of this project, but if it looked as though  Bigge  could  be  a
    good future client, I would offer to peer review the work for  him.   I
    would rather than Weeks and Weeks straighten out  their  own  work.   I
    don't like the idea of replacing Weeks with my firm.

5.     Many  engineers  think  it  is  too  time-consuming  to   check   the
    information provided by a party with a vested interest in  the  outcome
    of a project.

6.    Many engineers feel it is an affront to the other party to attempt  to
    check the veracity of the information provided.

7.    Engineers are often not adept at being aware of hidden agendas or  the
    motivations of the other party.  That is not usually thought of as part
    of being a practicing engineer.  If we had wanted to deal  with  people
    on a more introspective basis,  we  would  have  at  least  minored  in
    psychology.

8.    In most instances, engineers play a  reactive  role  to  the  real  or
    perceived needs of others (owners,  public  agencies,  developers,  the
    public, etc.), and as a result have convinced themselves that  everyone
    (except perhaps lawyers and politicians)  is  straight-forward,  honest
    and will not take advantage of the engineer.  This is  not  necessarily
    so.  Most engineers in today’s society cannot function effectively  and
    provide a quality service without being aware of the impacts of  public
    agencies, concerned citizens, vested stakeholders and others  on  their
    work and the way it is performed.  Operating in a vacuum is no longer a
    viable option.

9.    Decline the work.  It sounds as though it would be more  trouble  than
    it is worth.

