
                       Now You Have It, Now You Don't
                                 (Case 1016)

The mission of the National Institute for Engineering Ethics  (NIEE)  is  to
promote ethics in engineering practice  and  education.   One  component  of
NIEE  is  the  Applied  Ethics  in  Professional  Practice  (AEPP)  program,
providing free engineering  ethics  cases  for  educational  purposes.   The
following case may be reprinted if it is provided  free  of  charge  to  the
engineer or  student.   Written  permission  is  required  if  the  case  is
reprinted for resale.  For more cases and other NIEE  Products  &  Services,
contact  the  National  Institute  for  Engineering   Ethics,   Texas   Tech
University, www.niee.org..  (All reprints must contain these statements)

The Case:
The setting is Windsore County in northern California.  During the  El  Nino
winter, heavy weather  triggered  a  large  debris  flow  landslide  in  the
mountain area of the county.  The  landslide  partially  buried  ten  summer
homes situated along the bottom of a narrow canyon.  During  the  emergency,
the Windsore County Public Works Department hired Nearby Engineers, a  local
geotechnical engineering firm, as  a  sole  source  emergency  selection  to
evaluate the landslide.  Nearby  Engineers  determined  that  a  significant
additional debris flow hazard still  remained.   As  a  result,  The  County
condemned the ten summer home properties and developed a schematic  plan  to
protect other summer homes downstream by construction of an earth "dam"  and
debris collection basin, plus a large storm drain.

The Windsore County Public  Works  Department  then  issues  a  Request  for
Proposal (RFP) for engineering services  to  design  the  dam,  debris  flow
basin and storm drain.  The RFP stated that a firm would be selected on  the
basis  of  qualifications  and  experience  (as  they   typically   selected
consultants in the past).  They would then negotiate with the selected  firm
to arrive at an appropriate fee and contract (standard Qualifications  Based
Selection - QBS procedure).

Trueheart Engineers, Nearby  Engineers,  and  two  other  engineering  firms
responded to the  RFP,  each  submitting  qualifications  statements  and  a
proposed scope of services.  The County Public Works  Department  formed  an
interview and selection  committee  comprised  of  Public  Works  Department
professional staff members, who reviewed  the  submittals,  interviewed  the
four firms and ended up  selecting  Trueheart  Engineers  for  the  project.
Trueheart was notified of their selection.  They met with the  Public  Works
staff, refined the scope of work, and negotiated an acceptable fee  estimate
and contract provisions.  The contract  was  then  to  be  approved  by  the
Windsore County Board of Supervisors.

Shortly thereafter, Trueheart Engineers was notified by  the  County  Public
Works staff that the contract approval was delayed and that they  were  also
requesting a formal proposal from Nearby Engineers, which  was  a  deviation
from their previously announced QBS selection  process.   After  the  Public
Works Department  received  Nearby  Engineers'  proposal,  the  Director  of
Public  Works  overrode  the  staff's  previous  recommendations   to   hire
Trueheart Engineers, and he recommended to  the  Windsore  County  Board  of
Supervisors  that  Nearby  Engineers  be  hired  instead.   Notably,  Nearby
Engineers' scope of  work  and  contract  language  was  the  same  as  that
negotiated by Trueheart and the fee was the  same  as  Trueheart's.   Nearby
Engineers was hired for the project.

Nearby Engineers, Trueheart Engineers, members of the  County  Public  Works
interview/selection committee and the  Director  of  Public  Works  are  all
Registered  Professional  Engineers  and  belong  to  various   professional
organizations concerned with ethics.

Question 1:
You  are  the  President  of  Nearby  Engineers.   How  do  you  feel  about
submitting an additional proposal when you  know  that  Trueheart  Engineers
have already been selected for the project by the Public Works staff?

Question 2:
You are a professional engineer on the County Public Works Department  staff
and a  member  of  the  interview/selection  team  for  this  project.   The
Director of Public Works has overturned the announced QBS selection  process
as well as your professional evaluation of the proposed consultants.   What,
if anything, should you do?

Question 3:
You are the Director of Public Works, and although it is not known  to  your
staff, you have been instructed by a member of the Board of  Supervisors  to
hire Nearby Engineers regardless of the announced QBS  selection  procedure.
What, if anything, do you do?

Question 4:
You are the President of Trueheart Engineers.   You  and  your  staff  spent
considerable professional  time  after  you  were  notified  that  you  were
selected for the project, refining the scope of work  and  contract  -  time
which otherwise could have been spent on billable work  for  other  projects
under contract.  What, if anything, do you do?


Alternate Approaches and Survey Results for “Now You Have It Now You  Don’t”
(Case 1016)
Question 1 (President of Nearby Engineers):
1.    Your firm did all the emergency engineering work for the  project,  so
    this job was really supposed to be yours.  Therefore there  is  nothing
    wrong  with  submitting  the  additional  proposal  for   the   project
    assignment.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  4%

2.    Some people may think that  submitting  a  proposal  for  the  project
    assignment is contrary to the Engineering Society ethics code, but  the
    code is old and inflexible, and really doesn't  address  this  type  of
    situation.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  1%

3.    You were hesitant to submit a proposal and deviate from  the  "normal"
    QBS process, because you are concerned about setting a  precedent  that
    might work against your firm in a future RFP with the county.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  11%

4.    All is fair in business.   If  the  county  is  willing  to  bear  any
    additional scrutiny by requesting a proposal from your firm,  who  were
    you to turn down such an opportunity?
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  7%

5.    There is nothing wrong  with  submitting  a  proposal  for  the  final
    engineering work as requested by the county, even though the  committee
    had recommended Trueheart Engineering for the  work.   After  all,  the
    Director of Public Works does have the final say in these matters.   It
    is not as though you went behind Trueheart's back to get the work.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  11%

6.    Submitting a additional proposal for the final engineering  design  as
    requested is not unethical, because  there  must  have  been  something
    about the Trueheart proposal the Director of Public Works didn't  like.
    If you didn't submit this additional proposal, the Director would  feel
    that you are not responsive to his requests, and that would be a  black
    mark on your record the next time a project comes up for design.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  13%

7.    You should have inquired if the County  Public  Works  Department  had
    terminated negotiations with Trueheart Engineers.  If the  negotiations
    had not been terminated, Nearby Engineers should not have submitted the
    additional proposal.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  31%

8.    You should have notified Trueheart Engineers that your firm  had  been
    requested to submit an  additional  proposal.   That  would  then  have
    allowed you to pursue the project without any problem.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  11%

9.    You were relieved that your  firm  continues  its  close  relationship
    with the Public  Works  Department  Director  and  with  the  Board  of
    Supervisors.  In the future, you must remember to downscale  your  work
    scopes to the level of Trueheart Engineers.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  0%

10.   There is a fine line between unethical  behavior  and  good  business.
    In this case you have worked hard for a number of years  to  develop  a
    close relationship with the Director of Public Works and the members of
    the Board of Supervisors.  It is no surprise that they came back to you
    for another proposal.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  6%

11.   If the shoe were on the other foot,  Trueheart  Engineers  would  have
    done the same thing.  Additionally, you needed the work  to  meet  your
    payroll commitments to your employees.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  2%

12.   You are pleased that things worked out the way they did.   After  all,
    if your firm was good enough to  be  selected  to  do  the  preliminary
    engineering, why shouldn't you be good enough to do  the  final  design
    work?
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  3%

Question 2 (Professional Engineer on County Public Works Department staff):
13.   You should quit your job in disgust.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  3%

14.   You should ask the Public  Works  Director  what  the  basis  was  for
    overturning the department's selection committee recommendation,  which
    was based on the QBS (qualifications  based  selection)  procedure,  as
    advertised.  If you are satisfied with the reasons  given,  you  should
    express your objection to the way the matter was handled.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  50%

15.   You should ask the Public  Works  Director  what  the  basis  was  for
    overturning the department's selection committee recommendation,  which
    was based on the QBS (qualifications  based  selection)  procedure,  as
    advertised.  If  there  were  reasons  that  would  truly  benefit  the
    project, then fine.  If not, you should start looking for another  job.


      Percentage of votes agreeing:  12%

16.   Accept the decision of the Public Works Director, since it  was  never
    your decision to make any way.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  1%

17.   You realize that even though you  thought  the  QBS  process  was  the
    right way to select the design firm and understood it to be one of  the
    advertised  criteria   for   selection,   your   boss   overrode   your
    recommendations.  All you can do is be quiet and  not  jeopardize  your
    job.  After all, your job is in reality fairly  political,  and  you'll
    just have to accept that.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  3%

18.   You should get together with the other staff members on the  selection
    committee and try to reach a consensus  about  how  to  deal  with  the
    situation.  Then proceed according to whatever consensus is reached.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  15%

19.   You should call the  State  Board  of  Registration  for  Professional
    Engineers, get the name and telephone number of the chair of the Ethics
    Committee, call that person, explain the  dilemma  as  follows,  "On  a
    hypothetical basis, what would you recommend to an engineer  who  finds
    themselves in the following situation……..?"
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  12%

20.   This type of thing should not  go  unnoticed.   You  should  leak  the
    Director of Public Works' refusal to accept the recommendation  of  the
    staff selection committee to the local  press  without  divulging  your
    name.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  1%

21.   You should get together with the other staff members on the  selection
    committee and send letters of protest  to  the  local  section  of  the
    American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE), the state  chapter  of  the
    American Public Works Association  (APWA),  the  National  Society  for
    Professional engineers (NSPE) and as  many  others  as  come  to  mind,
    signed by each of you on the committee,  and  as  many  others  in  the
    department as are willing to do so.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  3%

Question 3 (Director of Public Works for the County):
22.   You should have quit your position in disgust.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  2%

23.   You should accept the decision of the Board of Supervisors,  since  it
    was never yours to make anyway.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  5%

24.   You should call the members of the  department's  selection  committee
    into your office and tell them that you had no  choice  in  the  issue,
    since you were directed by a member of the Board  of  Supervisors  (who
    are your bosses) to award the contract to Nearby Engineers.  You should
    also tell them that this information is  confidential  and  not  to  be
    mentioned outside of the office.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  5%

25.   You should have publicly declared the QBS selection process  null  and
    void because of changes in the selection process  as  dictated  by  the
    Board of Supervisors.  In that way the contract could then  be  awarded
    to  Nearby  Engineers  without  repercussion,   despite   any   ethical
    implications in the situation.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  3%

26.   You should have advised the member of the Board  of  Supervisors  that
    such  a  procedure  is  unethical  and  declined  to  carry   out   the
    instructions, even though it may jeopardize your  continued  employment
    as Public Works Director.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  22%

27.   You should have tried to determine if  the  member  of  the  Board  of
    Supervisors who directed you to hire Nearby Engineers is  speaking  for
    the entire Board, or just herself, then  made  a  decision  whether  to
    follow those directions or canvas the rest of the Board on a one-on-one
    basis.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  14%

28.   You should  have  appealed  to  the  full  Board  of  Supervisors  and
    explained to them that the procedure  demanded  by  one  of  the  Board
    members was unethical and not  in  keeping  with  accepted  engineering
    procedures.  If the Board had refused to rescind the instructions,  you
    should have told them that you declined to participate in the  revision
    of the design award and asked that someone else negotiate the  contract
    arrangements with Nearby Engineers.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  38%

29.   You should have terminated negotiations with Trueheart  Engineers  and
    advertised a new request for proposals (RFP) to be reviewed  by  a  new
    selection committee, which should have included the member of the Board
    of Supervisors.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  8%

30.   This is just another instance of this type of  heavy-handed  political
    maneuvering by some members of the Board of  Supervisors.   You  should
    have leaked the directive from the member of the  Board  to  the  local
    press.  Percentage of votes agreeing:  1%

31.   You should have done exactly what you did do,  and  keep  quiet  about
    who demanded the change in engineering firms.  After all, your  job  is
    very political, and you must keep peace with the Board  of  Supervisors
    if you expect to get things done without a lot of interference.   There
    will be other opportunities for Trueheart Engineers to submit proposals
    for new projects in the future.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  2%

32.   This is the way things are done in  the  public  sector  most  of  the
    time.  The decision was not yours, even though you stand  to  take  the
    heat for it, if there is any.  Trueheart Engineers  are  big  folk  and
    they should  understand  that  the  way  the  game  is  played  is  not
    necessarily the way it is advertised or appears in to the public.   You
    have to go along to get along in this type of public works position.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  1%

Question 4 (President of Truehart Engineers):
33.   You are outraged!  You should make an objection to the way  your  firm
    was treated in an open meeting of the  Board  of  Supervisors.   It  is
    unlikely   they   will   override   the   Public    Works    Director's
    "recommendation", but you'll feel a lot better in any event.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  10%

34.   You should call the President of  Nearby  Engineers,  indicating  that
    you are prepared to show her a draft of a formal ethics  complaint  and
    lawsuit, unless they are willing to decline the contract (in which case
    you will not proceed with the complaint and lawsuit).
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  6%

35.   You should contact each of elected representatives in the  County  and
    expose the deviousness of the Public Works Director.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  3%

36.   You should file  a  charge  of  professional  misconduct  against  the
    Public  Works  Director  with  the  State  Board  of  Registration  for
    Professional Engineers, since you  understand  that  Nearby  Engineer's
    scope of work, contract language and fee are identical to  yours.   You
    realize that you will be required to spend a substantial amount of time
    documenting the case and  trying  to  prove  that  something  unethical
    (collusion between the County and Nearby Engineers) has occurred.  This
    may be quite difficult, since you are not going to have the cooperation
    of the Public Works Director, Nearby Engineers or many (if any) of  the
    selection committee members.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  18%

37.   You should file a claim with the County  for  the  cost  of  the  time
    spent in preparing the proposal and in negotiations, claiming bad faith
    on their part, realizing that the claim will most  likely  be  rejected
    and you have spent even more lost time in on a poor situation.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  7%

38.   You should contact your  corporate  lawyer  and  file  a  damage  suit
    against the County and  its  Board  of  Supervisors  (individually  and
    jointly) for treble damages  based  on  all  of  Trueheart's  costs  in
    responding  to  the  County's  fallacious  Request  For  Proposals  and
    Trueheart's legal costs, on  the  basis  of  racketeering  and  blatant
    violation of public policy and law.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  8%

39.   There is nothing you can do to help your firm  in  such  a  situation,
    except try to figure out how bearing  the  brunt  of  this  unfair  and
    unethical treatment by the County can  be  turned  into  some  sort  of
    advantage for you in the future.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  6%

40.   You should grit your teeth and  do  nothing!   You've  been  had!   No
    matter what you do, it will reflect badly on the Public Works Director,
    and thereby greatly decrease the likelihood of your firm obtaining work
    from the County in the future.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  5%

41.   You have learned a valuable lesson by this experience.  That  is,  not
    to begin work on a project without a signed letter of authorization  to
    proceed or a signed contract so that if the project is cancelled or you
    are taken off the project you can still bill the client  for  the  time
    spent to date.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  35%

42.   If your firm is largely dependent on  work  from  Windsore  County  in
    order to make a reasonable profit and provide sufficient work for  your
    staff, you should consider converting it to an  internet  shopping  and
    delivery service for housewives in the surrounding area.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  3%


Forum Comments from Respondents
1.    As President of Nearby Engineers, you  should  find  out  as  much  as
    possible regarding the motivation for the County  requesting  a  second
    proposal.  It appears that by submitting a second proposal you might be
    undermining Trueheart Engineers, something that you don't  agree  with.
    Being an engineer and belonging to an engineering society, you know you
    would not like to be undermined by some other firm.  As a  result,  you
    should decline to submit a second proposal.

2.    The Director of Public Works has already lost his virginity (did  what
    he was told by the Commissioner) and there's no getting it back.  He is
    definitely hanging out there;  the  State  Board  won't  go  after  the
    Commissioner.  The time for  the  Director  of  Public  Works'  ethical
    decision has passed and he didn't make use of  it  (he  gets  along  by
    going along).  He is squarely on the hot seat.

   3. If you are President of Trueheart Engineers, the next  time  you  deal
      with the county (if you elect to do so again)  be  prepared  for  this
      type of situation and submit a written statement of clarification with
      your proposal, indicating that it is understood  and  agreed  that  if
      your firm is selected as a result of the  stated  and  advertised  QBS
      process, you will be awarded the contract.  Provide a  place  for  the
      Director of Public Works to date and sign and return a copy  for  your
      files.  If he declines to sign and return  the  agreement,  convene  a
      meeting of all of the consulting firms in the area and  convince  them
      to send a letter to the  Public  Works  Director  and  to  the  County
      Commissioners signed by all  of  the  firms  objecting  to  misleading
      practices in consultant selection, and  cite  the  applicable  law  or
      regulations which call for the QBS  selection  process.   Respectfully
      request a written reply.
