

                          A Fair Deal in Fairview?
                                 (Case 1034)

The mission of the National Institute for Engineering Ethics  (NIEE)  is  to
promote ethics in engineering practice  and  education.   One  component  of
NIEE  is  the  Applied  Ethics  in  Professional  Practice  (AEPP)  program,
providing free engineering  ethics  cases  for  educational  purposes.   The
following case may be reprinted if it is provided  free  of  charge  to  the
engineer or  student.   Written  permission  is  required  if  the  case  is
reprinted for resale.  For more cases and other NIEE  Products  &  Services,
contact  the  National  Institute  for  Engineering   Ethics,   Texas   Tech
University, www.niee.org..  (All reprints must contain these statements)

The Case:
In the early 1980s, Fairview, a medium-sized city, established  a  Community
Service  Corporation  (CSC)  for  the  purpose  of,  among   other   things,
revitalizing the City's downtown area.  The Fairview CSC was  envisioned  as
a catalytic, coordinating, and creative  force  to  partner  with  national,
state, and other local organizations that seek  to  solve  problems  through
service by means of entrepreneurial, innovative,  effective,  and  efficient
utilization of its resources and influence.

After doing an economic feasibility study and making a survey of  Fairview’s
retailers, the CSC leadership concluded that a significant  catalyst  needed
to be established in Fairview’s downtown area.  As an example, a  consultant
suggested an "off-price mall."  Using the statistical  data  developed,  the
group put  together  a  brochure  to  entice  developers  to  undertake  the
project, and numerous brochures were sent out but no one responded.

So it went for several years, with really nothing going on  in  the  way  of
downtown growth or revitalization.  But things  magically  began  to  happen
when Arthur, a principal in a  local  structural,  environmental  and  civil
engineering firm, was elected president of the Fairview CSC.

A long-time resident of Fairview, Arthur  had  the  personal  devotion,  the
vision, the political connections, and the  effervescent  energy  needed  to
get the revitalization going.  An active  citizen  nearing  retirement  age,
this was one of many volunteer positions  Arthur  participated  in,  and  he
received no compensation for any of his services.

Fairview’s  first  revitalization  success   accomplished   under   Arthur’s
leadership was to persuade the state government  to  build  a  state  office
building in the downtown area and to concentrate a number of its offices  in
the building.

Shortly after completion of that project, a second effort, to encourage  the
federal government to fund the construction  of  a  federal  courthouse  and
office building, was also successful.

To add to these projects, a “capstone” development has just been  announced.
 This new development includes a high rise county office  building  with  an
underground connection to the federal building and a  city  building,  along
with a central fire station, police station and city hall.

The Fairview community is ecstatic.  Arthur has enjoyed a high  profile  and
has generally been acknowledged as  a  leader  in  these  efforts,  and  his
selfless service in these wonderful successes is  being  praised  throughout
the City.

Selections are in the process of being made  for  the  design  work  of  the
federal courthouse and office building project, and the Fairview CSC –  even
though they are not the “Owner” – is one  of  the  organizations  that  will
directly participate in  influencing  the  awarding  of  contracts.   Larger
design firms are  beginning  to  contact  smaller  local  consulting  firms,
including Arthur’s firm, soliciting their participation.

Actually,  in  the  case  of  Arthur’s  firm,  just  one  year  ago   Arthur
transferred leadership to his son, David,  who  is  now  the  president  and
chief executive officer. Arthur is the chairman  and  principal  stockholder
of the firm.

A major design firm submitting a proposal to lead the design effort for  the
courthouse/ office building project asks David and Arthur  to  partner  with
them by providing the  production  aspects  of  the  civil/structural  work.
Arthur’s firm was not involved  in  the  previous  (state  office  building)
project, so this as a highly-significant and appealing opportunity, all  the
sweeter when viewed as the  well-deserved  pay-off  for  Arthur’s  years  of
volunteer  service,  local  presence,  and  investment   in   the   Fairview
community.

But therein lies the hitch.  Monroe, a competitor engineer in Fairview,  has
become aware of the possible teaming of Arthur and  David’s  firm  with  the
other company  (not  him).   Monroe  realizes  the  connections  and  unique
influence Arthur has had throughout the project development process  in  his
role as president of the CSC, and even though Arthur has  publicly  gone  on
record that he will abstain from deliberations about  the  awarding  of  any
engineering contracts, this does not satisfy Monroe.

Monroe has written letters to the editor of the Fairview newspaper  decrying
any type of involvement in the project by  Arthur  and  David’s  firm  as  a
conflict of interest.  Further, Monroe  has  started  “discussions”  of  the
issue in the State professional engineering community, couched  in  language
about protecting the ethics of the profession.

How should Arthur and David respond?

Note:
This case is based on National Society of Professional  Engineers  Board  of
Ethical Review Case 92-5, “Conflict of Interest –  Community  Service”,  and
is used with permission.

Alternate Approaches and Survey Results  for  “A  Fair  Deal  In  Fairview?”
(Case 1034)
 1. Pursue the opportunity, vigorously.  There is nothing  unethical  about
    proactive business opportunity development.  Arthur  and  David  should
    accept partnership on the project.  They were invited,  and  they  have
    earned respect by their previous efforts on behalf  of  the  community.
    While recusing himself from deliberations about consultant selection on
    the project, Arthur should stay involved  with  the  Community  Service
    Corporation and advise his son and the out-of-town  firm  how  to  best
    position themselves during proposing and negotiating.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 12%

 2. Check the law, carefully.  Arthur and  David  should  carefully  review
    their State licensure law provisions having to  do  with  conflicts  of
    interest.   Further,  they  should   personally   visit   their   State
    Engineering Licensure Board to explain their own position  on  what  is
    happening with respect to the project and the safeguards that have been
    put in place to avoid the appearance of a  conflict  of  interest,  and
    they should request that the Engineering Licensure  Board  undertake  a
    review and render an opinion.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 31%

 3. Invite third party opinion, publicly.  Arthur and David should approach
    the State Society of  Professional  Engineers  regarding  their  firm's
    intent to pursue the opportunity to participate in the  design  of  the
    project and call for  an  open  forum  within  the  state  professional
    community on the ethical issues.  In so doing,  Arthur  should  clearly
    and explicitly document how he will continue to abstain from  assisting
    the Community  Service  Corporation  in  providing  input  to  contract
    awards.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 14%

 4. Change the RFP, slightly.  Arthur should use  his  influence  with  the
    Community Service Corporation to  remove  subconsultant  services  from
    consideration as part of the selection of the prime  consultant.   This
    diffuses the conflict-of-interest issue, and once the prime  consultant
    is selected, that firm will be free to choose whichever  subconsultants
    they need for the project on the basis of qualifications. Arthur's firm
    still stands in good stead to win the contract, but without the ethical
    complications.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 6%

 5. Share the wealth, generously.  Realizing that there will be  plenty  of
    work to go  around,  Arthur  should  influence  the  Community  Service
    Corporation to devise a system whereby project work can be shared on  a
    rotation basis among local firms, including his  firm,  Monroe’s  firm,
    and other local design consultants.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 2%

 6. Create distance, deliberately.  Given Arthur’s history and success with
    the Community Service Corporation, the only way  Arthur  can  ethically
    pursue the work with the out-of-town firm and  avoid  the  conflict  of
    interest is to create distance between himself and the project.  Arthur
    must delegate all contact on this project to another senior manager  in
    his firm and divorce himself and  his  son  from  the  project.   Also,
    Arthur must exclude himself physically from  all  deliberation  by  the
    Community Service Corporation related to the project.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 4%

 7. Curtail CSC activity, temporarily.  Arthur realizes that if he  remains
    as president of the Community Service Corporation and his firm  pursues
    this project, there will be at least the appearance of  a  conflict  of
    interest.  Therefore, his firm should pursue  the  project  but  Arthur
    should take a sabbatical from the Community Service  Corporation  until
    the consultant is selected.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 2%

 8. Curtail CSC activity, definitively.  Arthur realizes that if he remains
    as president of the Community Service Corporation and his firm  pursues
    this project, there will be at least the appearance of  a  conflict  of
    interest.  Therefore, his firm should pursue  the  project  but  Arthur
    should take a sabbatical from the Community Service  Corporation  until
    construction is completed.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 2%

 9. Curtail CSC activity, completely.  Arthur realizes that if  he  remains
    as president of the Community Service Corporation and his firm  pursues
    this project, there will be at least the appearance of  a  conflict  of
    interest.  Therefore, his firm should pursue  the  project  but  Arthur
    should resign from the Community Service Corporation.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 8%

10. Walk away, happily.  Arthur and David should decline involvement in the
    project, thus protecting their reputations  and  enhancing  their  high
    esteem in Fairview.  Arthur should have realized when he  accepted  the
    presidency of the Community Service Corporation that his position would
    sooner or later place him and his firm  in  this  predicament.   If  he
    truly intended that his work for the CSC be a service to the community,
    Arthur can rejoice at his success in that area and not allow short-term
    impact on his firm to dampen his civic enthusiasm.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 18%

Forum Comments from Respondents
 1. Only by walking away from the  project  and  forsaking  any  chance  of
    profit can Arthur dispel all appearance of conflict and leave  everyone
    feeling assured of his sense of civic duty.  Simply resigning from  the
    CSC while still pursuing the project is insufficient sacrifice, because
    the CSC presidency is a volunteer position.

 2. Arthur was a non-paid executive so he did not benefit financially  from
    his community service. In order not to have any potential  conflict  of
    interest issues he should resign his  position  completely  before  his
    firm seeks the job.

 3. In the long run, refusing the contract will protect his  firm  and  the
    legacy he has built in his community.  Certainly,  Arthur's  work  with
    the CSC was on a charity/volunteer basis, and his pay-off was  building
    a city and better community.  He has also  built  for  himself  a  fine
    reputation and a new understanding of how civic projects  get  off  the
    ground.  This experience will become invaluable in other  contracts  in
    the future that have no conflict of interest and will  grow  his  firm.
    Arthur's character appears to be honest, however even an appearance  of
    an ethical lapse can destroy a lifetime of building a reputation, years
    of work at the CSC, and make receiving future work from competing firms
    impossible.   Arthur  should  leave  this  opportunity  to  others  not
    associated with the CSC.

 4. Arthur’s obligations to act faithfully and avoid deceptive acts require
    that he make a decision about whether to remain on the CSC or  continue
    his affiliation with the company he founded. Technically or not  Arthur
    is still seen as a principal figure within the company he founded—it is
    assumed that he is not yet ready to give up  his  stake.  The  greatest
    consequence would be  realized  if  Arthur  continued  on  his  present
    course. Were he to do this and the CSC  awarded  the  contract  to  the
    major design firm, Arthur would be ethically  obligated  to  step  down
    from the CSC, or, either vacate his position from his company  or  have
    his company withdraw from the design firm  partnership.  In  so  doing,
    Arthur puts his fellow CSC committee members in an awkward  predicament
    and he may even cause them to arbitrarily select a  different  company.
    The end result is that the integrity of the CSC, the integrity  of  the
    design firm, and Arthur’s own integrity might reasonably be challenged.
    The lesser consequence would  be  incurred  should  Arthur  permanently
    resign his post from the CSC. Then, should Arthur’s partnership get the
    contract, the integrity of the CSC might be brought into  question  but
    this issue would be entirely the responsibility of  the  CSC  committee
    members. Should the contract go to  another  design  firm,  Arthur  has
    simply to look for another challenge or seek reappointment to the  CSC.
    In any event, Arthur would bear no  responsibility  or  obligation  for
    choices made by the CSC members.

Comments from Board of Review Members
 1. Some observations on this case: 1)  Each  professional  must  have  and
    trust his or her own "ethics compass", and follow its guidance;  2)  It
    is very difficult  to  co-calibrate  the  ethical  compasses  of  those
    holding different worldviews, even if they are  from  within  a  single
    profession; and 3) Codified ethical standards are not clubs  or  wedges
    for forcing someone else to change their behavior; they  are  the  "the
    wicks of the candles" with which we should light our own way.

 2. David and Arthur are in a pickle. No matter how "clean"  the  selection
    process actually is, there will be an unavoidable perception  that  the
    process has been influenced by Arthur's position and influence. Is it a
    "conflict of interests?" It doesn't matter; it  will  be  perceived  as
    one. Because the services Arthur and David's firm provide  are  "lower-
    tier" subconsulting services, one solution to the dilemma would  be  to
    remove subconsultant services from selection of the prime consultant  -
    Architecture based services. Once the Architect is selected, he can  be
    free to choose whichever  subconsultants  he  needs  for  the  project.
    Arthur's firm still stands in good stead to win that contract, but  his
    influence over the selection process has been greatly diminished.
            Alternatively, Arthur's best choice is to remove his  firm  from
    the proposal process  completely,  so  that  the  project  can  proceed
    without contestation. His new position within the firm is irrelevant as
    he is still the principal shareholder and so the one who stands to gain
    the most from this engagement. Arthur  should  have  realized  when  he
    accepted the presidency of the organization  that  his  position  would
    sooner or later place him  and  his  firm  in  this  predicament.  It’s
    unfortunate that his great efforts are so poorly rewarded, but  perhaps
    they'll at least name a building in his honor.
            Arthur's weakest choice is to go on the offensive  and  confront
    Monroe's allegations as ridiculous and unfounded. He will initially win
    the press war, but ultimately, the tarnish the project, his  tenure  as
    president, and his firm. The project itself will wear  will  overshadow
    all the good things he was able to accomplish for the community.

 3. The conflict of interest is not the same in all states, at  least  from
    the perspective of engineering licensure law. Some state  statutes  are
    very specific and some are broad. Two examples are:
            South Carolina:  “When in public service as a  member,  advisor,
    or employee of a government body or department, the  Engineer  or  Land
    Surveyor shall  not  participate  in  considerations  or  actions  with
    respect to services provided by him  or  his  organization  in  private
    engineering or land surveying practices.”
            Georgia:  Same as above plus – “…An engineer shall  not  solicit
    or accept an engineering contract from a governmental body on  which  a
    principal or officer of his organization serves as a member.”
            Either of these can be interpreted to give Arthur  some  leeway.
    The first says that he must exclude himself from any activities  during
    proposing  and  negotiating  the  work  and  maybe  from   the   active
    participation in the project if his firm is awarded the  contract.  The
    second is similar but since the Community Service  Corporation  is  not
    the "Owner", Arthur  may  have  a  loophole  provided  service  on  the
    Community Service Corporation is not interpreted as "advisory"  to  the
    "Owner."

 4. David and Arthur should submit Monroe's letter to the  State  Board  of
    Engineers (SBOE), together with the description of  what  is  happening
    with respect to the "capstone" project and  the  safeguards  that  have
    been put in place to avoid the appearance of a  conflict  of  interest,
    and request that the SBOE's Ethics Committee  undertake  a  review  and
    render an opinion.  They should then write  to  the  community  service
    organization and the newspaper and  inform  both  that  if  the  SBOE's
    Ethics  Committee  rules  against  them,  then  their  firm  will   not
    participate in the project.  If they prevail,  their  competitor  looks
    like a jerk.  If not, then they've done the right thing.

 5. All codes of ethics in the engineering profession  prohibit  “conflicts
    of interest.”  The case herein raises the possibility of a conflict  of
    interest.  It should be noted  that  (1)  Arthur  is  involved  in  the
    Community Service Corporation, and the Community Service Corporation is
    not the owner of the project, and (2) Arthur has excused  himself  from
    participating  in  the  selection  of  the  consultant.   There  is  no
    indication that the Community Service Corporation will be  involved  in
    the design phase of the project.  Therefore, there is  no  conflict  of
    interest,  and  David’s  and  Arthur’s  firm  is  free  to  pursue  the
    assignment.

 6. The case focuses on Arthur and David for good reason, but the situation
    can easily be looked at from  other  perspectives.   For  example,  was
    Monroe's action ethical?  Was  Monroe’s  real  concern  protecting  the
    integrity of the profession, or was he using an ethics  smokescreen  to
    get the work?

