
                           Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell…
                                 (Case 1030)


The mission of the National Institute for Engineering Ethics  (NIEE)  is  to
promote ethics in engineering practice  and  education.   One  component  of
NIEE  is  the  Applied  Ethics  in  Professional  Practice  (AEPP)  program,
providing free engineering  ethics  cases  for  educational  purposes.   The
following case may be reprinted if it is provided  free  of  charge  to  the
engineer or  student.   Written  permission  is  required  if  the  case  is
reprinted for resale.  For more cases and other NIEE  Products  &  Services,
contact  the  National  Institute  for  Engineering   Ethics,   Texas   Tech
University, www.niee.org..  (All reprints must contain these statements)

The Case:
Reilly M. Karful, a wastewater process engineer with Slud, Gefl,  Owsdown  &
Hill (SGOH), has spent the last few weeks  designing  an  equalization  tank
for the wastewater treatment  plant  for  the  town  of  Whiteside.   It  so
happens that the existing  extended  aeration  treatment  plant  is  located
inside  one  room  of  a  pre-engineered  metal  building,  except  for  the
headworks, which consist of a screen.  The design that Reilly  is  proposing
includes installing a new tank inside the treatment room and relocating  the
screen on top of the tank.

During a design review, the reviewer, Yvonne Moore-Karful (distant  relation
to Reilly) of the architectural firm Plansem & Drawsem, notices that  sewage
plant headworks are covered by National Fire Protection  Association  (NFPA)
Code Section 820, which requires certain areas to be Class I, Division 1  or
Class  I,  Division  2;  i.e.,  “explosion  proof.”   Concerned  about   the
potential problem, Yvonne calls to let Reilly know that  moving  the  screen
into the  treatment  room  would  require  the  room  to  be  classified  as
explosion proof, and she follows up this call with a memo and her  notations
on the design drawings.  Reilly decides  to  double-check  this  information
and he reviews NFPA 820 himself.  The code indeed  appears  to  require  the
headworks and the existing treatment room to be explosion proof because  the
plant does not have primary settling tanks.

Reilly informs the  project  manager  at  SGOH,  Dante  McWaves,  about  the
matter, and gives him a copy of Yvonne’s memo.  With Reilly in  his  office,
Dante phones the client, Bull Parker, the town  commissioner,  to  make  him
aware of Reilly’s concerns.  Bull happens to be cleaning  his  shotgun  when
he gets Dante’s call.  News of cost increases and  delays  does  not  please
Bull, and he pointedly reminds Dante that the  project  is  behind-schedule,
that Whiteside needs this addition to  the  wastewater  treatment  plant  to
avoid non-compliance with State regulations, and that  Whiteside  is  not  a
wealthy town.  As he trips the action on the  shotgun,  as  if  to  place  a
shell in the chamber (Dante hears this over the  phone),  Bull  tells  Dante
that he’ll have the County Fire Code Official,  Bobby  Burns,  get  back  to
Dante.

Reilly notices the color drain from Dante’s face and that his hands  visibly
shake as he hangs up the phone.  Within  minutes,  the  fire  code  official
calls and informs Dante that the existing room is already  explosion  proof.
What luck!  The problem is solved and Dante, still  pale  yet  with  obvious
relief, informs Reilly that he doesn’t want to bother  Bull  with  any  more
problems.  Dante then clearly and unequivocally  directs  Reilly  to  finish
the project.

But Reilly is concerned.  While  Bobby  Burns’  statement  satisfies  Dante,
Reilly suspects the fire code official could be wrong.   Though  Reilly  has
limited experience with fire codes,  he  has  noticed  that  the  electrical
sockets, light  switches,  lighting  fixtures,  and  junction  boxes  appear
normal and don’t give the appearance of being explosion proof.   While  part
of him wants to pursue the matter,  he  also  realizes  that  exploring  his
doubts about the existing room being explosion proof will not  only  further
stress out  Dante,  but  could  result  in  additional  project  delays,  in
Whiteside having to fund an  expensive  retrofit  to  bring  their  existing
facility up to code, and in further annoying Bull.

What, if anything, should Reilly do?


Alternate Approaches and Survey Results for “Don’t Ask, Don’t  Tell…”  (Case
1030):
 1. Get on  with  it.   Reilly  should  accept  the  fire  code  official’s
    statement, as well as Dante’s directive, and get on  with  the  project
    without delay.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 0%

 2. Cover your backside.  Reilly should accept  the  fire  code  official’s
    statement, as well as Dante’s directive, and get on with  the  project,
    after first taking the time to carefully document  his  concerns  about
    the entire situation in a detailed memo to file.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 7%

 3. Use the opportunity to learn.  Since Reilly is admittedly inexperienced
    with explosion-proof switches and fixtures, he should “quietly” do some
    homework on the internet and with electrical contractors  or  suppliers
    to determine how to identify whether  the  fixtures  in  the  treatment
    plant room are explosion-proof, and he should go out to  the  site  and
    make the appropriate inspection.  If something is indeed amiss,  Reilly
    should estimate the cost for explosion-proofing the treatment room, and
    compare this with the costs  of  alternative  designs  which  will  not
    require explosion-proofing.  He should not charge this  effort  to  the
    project, but do it on his own time,  and  once  he  feels  he  has  the
    solution, he should outline a recommended course of action  and  notify
    Dante of his findings.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 18%

 4. This is too big to handle alone.  Realizing that Bull  has  effectively
    intimidated Dante, Reilly should, without Dante’s  knowledge,  approach
    SGOH’s managing principal, Mr. Owsdown, and share  his  concerns  about
    the fire code official’s seemingly “convenient”  statement,  and  about
    Dante’s acquiescence  in  the  matter.   Reilly  should  await  further
    instruction while Mr. Owsdown deals with Dante.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 4%

 5. Comply with the code of ethics.  In the interest of the  public  health
    and safety, Reilly should pursue his concerns until he feels the matter
    is satisfactorily addressed.  At the least, this would consist of doing
    some  homework  and  having  a  qualified   independent   third   party
    knowledgeable of the NFPA requirements – perhaps Yvonne –  inspect  the
    treatment room with him.  If something is indeed amiss,  Reilly  should
    engineer appropriate solutions.  Further, Reilly should bill  all  this
    work to the project, even though it will  surely  result  in  a  budget
    overrun for Dante, but that is a small matter compared  to  the  public
    safety and welfare.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 15%

 6. There are many ways to solve a problem.  Reilly should call a friend at
    the local newspaper and – with the agreement that he be identified only
    as a “reliable source”  –  share  his  concerns  about  the  fire  code
    official’s seemingly “convenient” statement, and  about  Bull  Parker’s
    intimidation tactics.  He knows that his  newspaper  friend  will  make
    appropriate inquiry, and this will  pressure  Bull  and  Bobby  to  act
    responsibly without Reilly having to get wrapped up in  SGOH’s  company
    politics.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 1%

 7. Implement company loss prevention training.  After giving Dante time to
    pull himself together, Reilly  should  approach  Dante  and  share  his
    concerns  about  the  fire  code  official’s   seemingly   “convenient”
    statement.  Further, he should suggest a  game  plan  that  shifts  the
    liability off of their firm, such as  requesting  that  the  fire  code
    official provide written confirmation of the explosion-proof nature  of
    the treatment room.  This gets Reilly’s and Dante’s  firm  legally  off
    the hook if an explosion occurs.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 10%

 8. Run towards  the  roar.   After  giving  Dante  time  to  pull  himself
    together, Reilly should approach Dante and share his concerns about the
    fire code official’s seemingly  “convenient”  statement.   Further,  he
    should suggest that both he and Dante  visit  Bull  Parker  to  explain
    their concerns, as well as the ramifications of negligence and the fact
    that an engineer may not ignore codes in a design.  While  risky,  this
    puts the issue back in the client’s court.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 15%

 9. Go to the source.  After giving Dante time to  pull  himself  together,
    Reilly should approach Dante and share his concerns about the fire code
    official’s  seemingly  “convenient”  statement.   Further,  he   should
    suggest that both he and Dante visit the fire code official and arrange
    for a meeting and inspection of the existing treatment  plant  room  to
    look into their concerns.  Perhaps the fire  code  official  has  never
    been in the room, or has mistaken it for another,  properly  explosion-
    proofed room.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 29%

10. Check it to them.  Reilly  should  inform  Dante  that  he  refuses  to
    continue with the project, and  resign  from  the  firm  if  necessary.
    While this will be costly to  him,  it  is  surely  better  than  being
    involved when the sludge hits the fan!
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 1%

Forum Comments from Respondents
 1. I suggest solution #3 (use the opportunity to learn) with the following
    changes.  If something is  obviously  amiss,  a  little  homework  will
    reveal that to Reilly.  Then he has some real facts to take a stand on.
     If Dante, Bull, or the fire official still refuse to  accept  the  new
    plans to bring the facility up to code, Reilly can bring the  issue  to
    Mr. Owsdown or other officials and insist on an independent inspection.
     If after doing his homework, it is still not clear to  Reilly  whether
    the facility is explosion proof,  it  should  be  acceptable,  probably
    mandatory for a routine  inspection  by  the  fire  official  or  other
    qualified inspector to OK the renovation in writing.   At  that  point,
    there should be no need to doubt the integrity of the fire official, or
    to insist on additional independent inspections.

 2. Although there is intimidation involved,  ensuring  that  the  room  is
    secure in the event of a fire is  more  important  than  coming  in  on
    budget and on time.  Even if it costs Reilly  his  job,  he  must  take
    action whether he likes it or not to verify the safety  of  those  that
    will be in that area.

 3. Doing your homework and double-checking is the way to go.  This  is  an
    opportunity for Reilly to  do  his  homework  on  the  explosion  proof
    aspects of the code and this will give him experience for  the  future.
    He ought to also double check with the fire official  after  explaining
    his concern with Dante.  This, I feel, is not disloyal to  the  client,
    employer or the public.  Since they do indeed need to comply with code,
    Reilly will be looking out for the best interests of both  the  company
    and client, while also following the code of ethics.

 4. If going to the source doesn't prove successful in fixing the  problem,
    then Reilly should continue up the chain of command until  the  problem
    gets due attention.  If  this  is  all  to  no  avail,  then  a  little
    attention from the local media would surely  do  the  trick.   Although
    Reilly puts his job in serious jeopardy if the media route  is  chosen,
    he can rest assured that he did everything within his power to maintain
    the safety of plant employees.

 5. Before visiting Bull, Reilly needs to do some research  as  to  whether
    the room meets the "explosion-proofed  room"  standards.   Further,  he
    should explore some possible solutions to the problem so  that  he  can
    suggest a viable approach.

 6. Reilly should take the time to  place  this  situation  into  the  five
    ethical standards and think it through:  The Golden Rule Standard,  The
    Professional  Ethic,  Immanuel  Kant's  Categorical   Imperative,   The
    Utilitarian Rule, and The "60 Minutes" Test.  From his  conclusions  to
    these five ethical standards, Reilly  should  then  make  his  decision
    about what should and needs to be done.

 7. Go to the source.  If Dante refuses to go to the  fire  code  official,
    then Reilly should inform Dante that he refuses to  continue  with  the
    project, and resign from the firm if necessary.

 8. After choosing solution #2 (cover your backside), I would also take the
    approach on solution #3 (use the opportunity to learn) and  go  to  the
    internet and learn about fire-proof rooms and do further inspection  to
    see whether the room complies with  the  information  gathered  by  the
    research.  If it does not, I would  document  the  condition  and  take
    necessary actions.

 9. I don't feel like I am ready to handle these types of things  yet  (Ed.
    note: this  response  is  from  a  graduate  engineer  with  3.5  years
    experience).

10. To comply with the code of ethics, means must be made to secure safety.
      Research  and  professional  insight  should  be   introduced   while
    simultaneously asking for a letter of proof from the fire code official
    to  cover  themselves!   When  the  information  is  gathered  and  the
    situation is clearly understood, then throw the ball into Bull's court!

11. Going to the source is a great approach, but I would include Yvonne  in
    the meeting.  She was the design reviewer who made the original comment
    about the explosion proof room.  If the  local  inspector  is  able  to
    convince her, then the problem is solved and the project  can  proceed.
    If she is not convinced, then Reilly is obligated to pursue a  solution
    that the reviewer will accept.

12. If I were Reilly, I would pursue solution #8 (run  towards  the  roar).
    This option calls for a meeting  with  Reilly,  Dante  and  Bull  (i.e.
    engineer, project manager and client).  The purpose of the  meeting  is
    to allow input from all parties and inform the  client  (Bull)  of  the
    ramifications to ignoring the code. In my  opinion  this  is  the  best
    option suggested because it addresses the problem in accordance to  the
    Code of Ethics.

13. The course of action should be solution #5 (comply  with  the  code  of
    ethics).  This option is the best choice for several  reasons.   First,
    public safety is to be recognized as the top priority of  any  project.
    Fire codes are written as a direct result of tragedy.  They are lessons
    learned  the  hard  way.   There  are  both  legal   and   humanitarian
    motivations to building “up to code”. The safety of the public is  best
    considered by meeting with Bull  and  addressing  the  issue  head  on.
    Secondly, although Bull may be an intimidator he is still  the  client.
    Reilly has a duty to the client to keep him informed of what  is  going
    on and to guide him towards the right engineering solution.  The option
    of running toward the roar is the only option that takes the  situation
    back to the client in a professional manner.  This option is  supported
    by canons 1 & 4 of the ASCE Code of Ethics.  Further, Canon  1  of  the
    Code of Ethics instructs engineers  to  view  the  safety,  health  and
    welfare of the public as their primary goal.  By meeting with  Bull  to
    “clear the air,”  Reilly  would  in  fact  be  serving  the  public  by
    educating Bull of the problem and the need to handle it correctly.   By
    addressing the issue directly  with  Bull,  Reilly  would  assure  that
    whether Bull continues to use  SGOH,  he  is  at  least  aware  of  the
    consequences of his decisions.  Canon 4 of  the  ASCE  Code  of  Ethics
    states that engineers should act as faithful  agents  or  trustees  for
    their employer or client.  In this case Reilly and Dante need  to  take
    the roles of both engineers and lawyers.  As  engineers  they  need  to
    inform their client of the technical aspects of the undertaking and  to
    advise their client of the technically correct course of action.   They
    can accomplish this by informing Bull of their findings and/or concerns
    and suggesting a workable solution.  They can  give  Bull  examples  of
    similar situations, and their outcomes, where the  decisions  were  not
    made correctly.  Reilly and Dante have  a  responsibility  to  convince
    Bull that although the decision may be hard and will certainly lead  to
    cost overruns, it is the best decision for safety and financial reasons
    (doing it right once is always  cheaper  than  doing  it  twice).    As
    “lawyers,” Reilly and Dante need to protect their  client  by  strongly
    advising him to choose the legally correct course of action.  They need
    to educate Bull of the legal reasons why he should heed the precautions
    of re-inspecting the room and re-designing it  in  accordance  to  fire
    code.  Reilly and Dante need to convince  Bull  that  not  only  is  he
    making the right choice for the town but he is also protecting his  own
    reputation.  In conclusion, although I feel that the “run  towards  the
    roar” option is the best choice for this situation, I do feel  that  it
    falls a little short of perfect.  For example, there  is  nothing  said
    about what will be done if Bull doesn’t come around  and  continues  to
    insist on proceeding with the project as is.   There is also no mention
    of when to inform the principal (Mr. Owsdown) of the situation.   Dante
    and Reilly work for Mr. Owsdown and he should be informed  as  soon  as
    possible and prior to the meeting with Bull as  he  may  have  valuable
    suggestions based on his experience for how to deal with the situation.
     I believe that if Reilly and Dante do a competent  job  of  explaining
    the situation, Bull will make the right choice.  But, if Bull does  not
    accept the situation, Reilly and  his  firm  should  pull  out  of  the
    program and document  why  in  a  letter  sent  to  both  Bull  and  an
    engineering firm that would take over the work.

14. While Reilly should educate himself, once he discovers that the room is
    not explosion proof, all cost to  redesign  /  re-engineer  a  solution
    should be billable.

15. I think these actions are a  little  premature  but  a  combination  of
    aspects from solutions #8 (run towards the roar)  and  #9  (go  to  the
    source) would be the most efficient and ethical. Reilly should call the
    fire code official back and ask the exact  requirements  for  explosion
    proof rooms. Then after personal inspection, if there is  any  question
    that the room is not satisfactory Reilly should arrange a meeting  with
    the fire code official.  Further, Reilly should ask the  fire  official
    to sign off that the room is indeed explosion proof. This  way,  Reilly
    has covered himself and his firm.

16. Reilly should begin by documenting everything as it occurred.  Then, he
    should approach Dante and  visit  the  fire  code  official  with  him.
    Reilly should also enlist a third party to inspect the  room,  such  as
    Yvonne.  Once these things were done, Reilly should accompany Dante  to
    visit Mr. Owsdown to make him aware of the situation.  At  this  point,
    Reilly should ask for Mr. Owdown’s support and  suggestions.   Finally,
    Reilly should approach Bull with all the facts  gathered  and  offer  a
    solution that meets code.  If Bull  still  ignores  the  facts,  Reilly
    might consider "leaking" the story to the media to put some pressure on
    Bull.  If it comes down to Reilly being forced  to  complete  a  faulty
    design, he should resign.  Regardless of  the  documentation,  Reilly’s
    name would be associated with the structure, and he should not wish  to
    have any part in the disaster  that  might  ensue  from  an  improperly
    designed building.

Comments from Board of Review Members
17. Reilly recognizes that he is not the official who certifies  fire  code
    issues, but remains concerned about the situation nonetheless.  As  the
    engineer of record for the project, he  might  send  a  letter  to  the
    county fire official explaining his concerns and formally requesting  a
    signed letter certifying that the building meets the Class I,  Division
    I requirements.  Reilly would  keep  this  letter  for  his  files  and
    forward a copy to the owner.

18. Reilly rightly guards his professional  reputation  and  realizes  that
    this project must succeed both  in  terms  of  scheduled  delivery  and
    quality of design.  Consequently, Reilly  might  contact  another  fire
    inspector and request an independent evaluation of the building's  fire
    protection.  If  the  independent  appraisal  finds  the  building  not
    satisfactory, Reilly would need to inform the  city  that  repairs  are
    required.

19. Reilly should make a memorandum for record of the  telephone  call  and
    provide copies by certified mail to the fire  official,  city  and  all
    other parties involved in the project.  If no one  disputes  the  memo,
    Reilly is legally covered in the event of a future problem.

20. Reilly should put his head together with Dante and  settle  on  a  game
    plan that shifts the liability back to the County (after all, it’s  the
    County’s project).  Dante needs to have the fire code  official,  Bobby
    Burns, provide a written confirmation of the explosion-proof nature  of
    the treatment room.  If Bobby Burns is not willing to  provide  such  a
    written confirmation, then Dante should write him a letter,  certified,
    return receipt requested, summarizing the conversation  and  concluding
    with a statement to the effect of, “If any of the foregoing is  not  in
    accord with your recollection of our conversation, it is important that
    you provide me with a written clarification of our  discussion.”   This
    helps manage the liability aspects of the problem.

21. Reilly should make an appointment with Yvonne to inspect the  treatment
    room.  If Yvonne is an expert on NFPA codes, she should be able to tell
    if additional concern is warranted.  Reilly is admittedly not an expert
    on NFPA codes and he should be able to obtain guidance from Yvonne.

22. Reilly should prepare a  brief  internal  memo  to  Dante  stating  his
    concerns regarding the potential  code  violation  and  the  associated
    safety issues as they apply to the  people  currently  and  potentially
    working in the reconfigured treatment plant.   He  should  ask  for  an
    opportunity to discuss his concerns in detail with Dante. Additionally,
    if the matter of who the responsible, licensed,  Professional  Engineer
    for this design has not been made clear, Reilly  should  ask  Dante  to
    clarify the firm’s policy  regarding  professional  responsibility  for
    this project. On the assumption that Reilly will be asked to  sign  and
    seal the documents, then he should state his need to check  the  actual
    condition of the facility with regard to code compliance and to  assure
    that the reconfigured facility will meet the fire code.   If  the  firm
    decides to ignore the issue and proceed without addressing the apparent
    present and future  code  violations,  Reilly  should  “polish-up”  his
    resume and look for a more professionally oriented employer.

23. Many, if not most, codes of ethics provide that the health, safety  and
    welfare of the public is  paramount.   This,  therefore,  requires  the
    engineer to take all reasonable steps to protect the health, safety and
    welfare of the public.  The facilities (equipment, switches, etc.)  not
    meeting the building code requirements for  explosion  proof  certainly
    places the public’s health and safety  in  question.    Reilly  has  an
    ethical obligation to take action.  He should  first  advise  the  fire
    code official that he has observed that the electrical system does  not
    meet the fire code.  If the fire official declines to take any  action,
    then Reilly should advise his  supervisor,  Dante  McWaves,  about  his
    concern. If Dante McWaves declines to  take  any  action,  then  Reilly
    should write a memorandum to Dante McWaves, with a copy to Bull  Parker
    (the town commissioner) and the fire code official, advising about  the
    violation of the building code and requesting that he be authorized  to
    make the appropriate revisions even though  additional  cost  and  time
    will be involved.  If Dante McWaves declines to give the authorization,
    or declines to respond, Reilly should request being  removed  from  the
    project.  This may very well cost Reilly his employment, but the health
    and safety  of  the  public  is  paramount,  even  at  the  expense  of
    employment.

