

                         Where the Green Grass Grows

                                 (Case 1002)

The mission of the National Institute for Engineering Ethics  (NIEE)  is  to
promote ethics in engineering practice  and  education.   One  component  of
NIEE  is  the  Applied  Ethics  in  Professional  Practice  (AEPP)  program,
providing free engineering  ethics  cases  for  educational  purposes.   The
following case may be reprinted if it is provided  free  of  charge  to  the
engineer or  student.   Written  permission  is  required  if  the  case  is
reprinted for resale.  For more cases and other NIEE  Products  &  Services,
contact  the  National  Institute  for  Engineering   Ethics,   Texas   Tech
University, www.niee.org..  (All reprints must contain these statements)

The Case:
Ralph Horn  was  an  engineer  working  for  the  Gamma  Group,  a  national
specialized engineering firm with headquarters in Boston and branch  offices
in Winston-Salem, New Orleans, Chicago, Salt Lake City, Boise  and  Seattle.
He had started working for the firm  in  their  Chicago  office  immediately
after receiving his  MS  degree  in  engineering  from  a  noted  midwestern
university in 1982.  His wife, Karla, also started her career  in  financial
computing systems about the same time.  Ralph was  a  diligent  worker,  and
handled  most  of  the  projects  to  which  he  was  assigned  efficiently,
producing technically excellent reports and designs.  As a result,  by  1991
he advanced to a project manager position in the firm and was considered  to
be one of the office’s most valuable  employees  by  the  firm’s  president,
Dirk Wheeler.

In 1994, Ralph’s wife, Karla, decided that  her  career  had  stagnated  and
after searching around, found a much more attractive position paying  almost
twice her present salary in Omaha, Nebraska.  She accepted the position  and
Ralph was forced to make a career move himself if  he  planned  to  preserve
their marriage. Since his firm  did  not  have  an  office  near  Omaha,  he
approached his manager and together they  made  a  proposal  to  the  firm’s
president, Dirk Wheeler, to open  a  small  branch  office  in  Omaha  under
Ralph’s management.  The proposal was accepted and the Omaha branch was  set
up.  By 1996 that office had 18 employees, including 10 engineers, two  CADD
operators, three technicians, a  secretary/receptionist,  a  bookkeeper  and
Ralph, who was the principal engineer and branch manager.

The business was reasonably  profitable  and  Ralph  had  attracted  several
substantial clients.   In  addition,  the  work  forecast  for  the  future,
estimated to be on the order of $1.3 million,  looked  most  promising.   At
that point Ralph was approached by  Dirk  Wheeler,  who  had  been  suddenly
fired by the Gamma Group in 1995 for attempting to sell the  entire  company
to an entrepreneurial conglomerate without the consent of the stockholders.

Wheeler had subsequently become involved with Compass Associates, a  general
engineering company with several offices in the mid-section of the  country,
but not in Omaha.  Compass was interested  in  having  an  office  in  Omaha
capable of providing the same type of specialized  engineering  services  as
Ralph’s Gamma Group office.  Dirk Wheeler was interested in  the  same  goal
so that he could secure a position with Compass,  and  offered  to  make  an
arrangement with Ralph to open a  wholly  owned  subsidiary  of  Compass  in
Omaha with Ralph as the manager and Wheeler as the subsidiary’s president.

While Ralph was  not  sure  that  he  wanted  to  be  involved  in  such  an
arrangement, Karla pointed out that the salary and  potential  bonuses  with
Compass would be far greater than what  he  was  receiving  from  the  Gamma
Group, there would be less stress on him about acquiring new business  since
Wheeler was a born salesman, and Wheeler had provided  the  opportunity  for
them to move to Omaha in the first place......obviously he liked  Ralph  and
would look out for him.  Just to make sure, Karla agreed with  Dirk  Wheeler
that Ralph should work part-time for Compass for two or three months to  get
things set up before leaving the Gamma Group.

As a result, about three months later Ralph announced to  the  personnel  in
the Gamma Group’s Omaha branch office at 3:00 p.m. on a Friday that  it  was
his last day  there,  and  wished  them  well,  telling  them  that  he  was
transferring to Compass Associates  to  do  the  same  kind  of  specialized
engineering work for them.  At the same time, Dorph Klingstad,  one  of  the
more senior engineers in the same Gamma Group Omaha office,  announced  that
he also was leaving to go to work for Compass with Ralph, and they  expected
to be working on projects for the same clients as they presently served.

Needless to say, not much more work was accomplished that day as  Ralph  and
Dorph cleaned out their offices and departed, and  the  rest  of  the  staff
spent their time in small groups discussing this sudden turn of  events  and
what was to become of each of them.  One of  the  engineers  called  Gamma’s
main office in Boston to see who was going to replace Ralph,  and  was  told
that it was the first they had heard of  Ralph  and  Dorph  leaving.   As  a
result, there were no specific plans at the moment, and it would be  several
days or more until Gamma’s management could unravel the events and plan  for
the future of the Omaha office.

Over the weekend, Ralph’s wife, Karla, spent a substantial  amount  of  time
on the telephone talking to most of Gamma’s Omaha office employees,  telling
them that since Ralph and Dorph had now left,  there  would  be  no  one  to
bring in new business, and the existing clients would most certainly  follow
Ralph to the new Compass Associates office.  She also extolled  the  virtues
of Compass Associates, including what a good place it would be to work,  and
suggested pointedly that  if  they  were  interested  in  maintaining  their
income, they should commit to transferring to Compass Associates as well.

By the end of the following week, everyone in  the  old  Gamma  Group  Omaha
office except the secretary, one of the technicians  and  one  of  the  CADD
operators had resigned and gone immediately to work for Ralph  and  Dirk  in
the new Compass Associates office a block down the street.

Issues: (1) If you had been one of the engineers in the  Gamma  Group  Omaha
office, what would you have done in this situation?  (2)  How  do  you  feel
about Ralph’s actions?


Alternate Approaches and Survey Results for “Where the  Green  Grass  Grows”
(Case 1002)

Issue 1:  As one of the engineers in the Gamma Group Omaha office,  I  would
have:
1.     Waited  to  see  what  the  Gamma  Group  main  office  provided  for
    continuity of the business, including  who  would  be  the  new  branch
    manager, and how many clients stayed with Gamma  as  opposed  to  going
    with Ralph to Compass Associates.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  0%

2.    Called the president of the Gamma Group at home in Boston as  soon  as
    I hung up the telephone after Ralph’s wife Karla had called to warn him
    of the things that were taking place.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  35%

3.    Called each of the clients that Ralph had been working with  the  find
    out if they intended to transfer their projects and future business  to
    Compass Associates, as Ralph had indicated they would.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  4%

4.    Called the president of the Gamma Group at home in Boston as  soon  as
    I hung up the telephone after Ralph’s wife Karla had called to ask  him
    what he intended to do about the situation  and  what  my  future  with
    Gamma was going to be.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  13%

5.    Talked with the rest of the Gamma Omaha  staff  over  the  weekend  to
    form a unified action group, and informed Gamma’s main office in Boston
    that it was time to choose a new branch manager from among  the  group,
    negotiate raises and provide new fringe benefits and  upgraded  working
    conditions for the group if Gamma expected to  keep  the  Omaha  office
    operational.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  9%

6.    Called the president of the Gamma Group at home in Boston as  soon  as
    I hung up the telephone after Ralph’s wife Karla had called  to  advise
    him of the things that were taking place and to offer to take  over  as
    the interim branch  manager  until  the  corporate  office  could  make
    satisfactory arrangements for the office.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  39%

7.    Called Dorph to find out what  kind  of  deal  he  made  with  Compass
    Associates, and then call Ralph to tell him that you are willing to  go
    to Compass with him as long as you can make a similar deal (or better).
     After all, you do not owe the Gamma Group anything, and the  best  way
    for professional and financial advancement is to  be  willing  to  move
    from company to company when the right opportunity presents itself.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  0%

Issue 2:  How do you feel about Ralph’s actions?
8.    Ralph was smart to have kept in touch with Dirk  Wheeler  and  promote
    the opportunity to transfer to Compass for what must be  a  substantial
    increase in salary.  If you aren’t willing  to  help  yourself  further
    your own career, who will?
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  3%

9.    Ralph was clever to let his wife call all of the Gamma employees  over
    the weekend to persuade them to  transfer  to  Compass  Associates.  It
    would be very difficult to perform work for  his  clients  without  the
    help of the technical staff, since Compass did not  have  much  of  any
    staff at this new start-up location, nor did any of the rest of Compass
    Associates’ offices  have  experience  with  this  type  of  work.   By
    allowing Karla to call the Gamma employees, no one could say that Ralph
    had coerced them into transferring companies.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  0%

10.   Ralph was wise to have worked on a few projects with Compass prior  to
    transferring, in order to see if it would be possible to  do  work  for
    clients under the Compass Associates’ management setup should he decide
    to change companies,  since  Compass  did  not  have  Ralph’s  type  of
    technical expertise and experience with similar types of projects.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  0%

11.   Ralph should have  kept  his  wife,  Karla,  from  calling  the  Gamma
    employees over the weekend.  They knew that Ralph was setting up a  new
    group at Compass and that he would need their type of expertise.   Each
    of them could contact Ralph or Dirk Wheeler directly,  if  they  wanted
    to.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  15%

12.   By working on projects for Compass for  two  or  three  months  before
    leaving  the  Gamma  Group,  Ralph  was  moonlighting  without  Gamma’s
    permission, which is unethical.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  49%

13.   If Ralph wanted to leave the Gamma Group, he should have  talked  with
    Gamma’s president a sufficient time before  his  resignation  to  allow
    Gamma to make a relatively smooth transition, since Ralph was the Gamma
    branch manager.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  33%

14.   Ralph was wise not to talk to Gamma’s president before resigning.   If
    he had, Gamma would have anticipated the possibility  of  Ralph  taking
    clients with him and would  have  taken  steps  to  prevent  that  from
    happening, which would have seriously decreased Ralph’s ability to make
    a success of his new operation at Compass Associates.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  0%



Forum Comments from Respondents

Issue 1: What to do as one  of  the  engineers  in  the  Gamma  Group  Omaha
    office:
1.    While the Gamma home office should be given a chance to react  to  and
    rectify the situation with the help of the remaining  Omaha  staff,  it
    must occur quickly to avoid real tendency of the staff to “cover  their
    a__” and bail out.

2.    Immediately upon Ralph’s  announcement,  gather  the  members  of  the
    Omaha office together and place a conference call to the  President  of
    the Gamma Group to apprise  him/her  of  the  situation.   Explain  the
    surprise of the staff at the announcement, and  explain  that  we  need
    immediate direction to keep the office  moving.   Our  livelihoods,  as
    well as the company’s business, are at stake.

3.     Unless  Gamma  makes  commitments  to  the  remaining   Omaha   staff
    immediately, they should be free to take  whatever  opportunities  come
    their way.

4.    Do  not  go  to  work  for  Ralph.   His  actions  were  intentionally
    deceptive. He obviously has no loyalty toward his employer, and I would
    expect none from him to me!

5.    Word spreads fast in the professional world.  If  I  went  to  Compass
    and ever wanted to leave, what kind of reputation would I have since  I
    was directly associated with them?

6.    Mention to the rest of the Omaha staff that what Ralph had been  doing
    was unethical, and might even be illegal.  They  might  want  to  think
    about being associated with illegal activities should  they  decide  to
    follow Ralph immediately.

7.    I would not want to be associated with people  like  Dirk,  Ralph  and
    Dorph.  If they treated the Gamma Group as they  did,  how  would  they
    treat me in the future?


Issue 2: Opinions regarding Ralph’s actions in the situation:
1.    Ralph should have declined Dirk Wheeler’s offer to switch  firms,  and
    focused on Gamma Group’s business.  The  fact  of  Wheeler’s  dismissal
    from Gamma should have been sufficient indication to Ralph that Wheeler
    had a severe lack of business and professional ethics.

2.    Since Ralph was the branch manager for Gamma, he  should  have  talked
    with Gamma’s president a sufficient  time  before  his  resignation  to
    allow Gamma to make a relatively smooth transition.

3.    As Gamma’s designated manager in Omaha, Ralph was  the  employer,  and
    the staff had no obligation to initiate back-channel communication with
    the corporate headquarters.  However, as the staff’s “employer”,  Ralph
    had an obligation to advise the firm of his departure and to assist the
    firm in its obligation to sustain the opportunity for the  Omaha  staff
    to have or to find equivalent employment.

4.    By working on projects for Compass before  leaving  the  Gamma  Group,
    Ralph was moonlighting  without  Gamma’s  permission,  which  is  quite
    unethical.

5.    The lack of notice to Ralph’s company (Gamma) is very  unprofessional.
     There is not much we can  do  about  clients  following  their  former
    contact, but to destroy and entire  office  is  not  forgivable.   This
    should  go  to  the  Board  of  Registration  for  review  of   Ralph’s
    professional license.

6.    Ralph should have shown his “friend”  (Dirk  Wheeler)  the  door.   He
    left a company which had supported him by setting up a branch office so
    that he could solve a problem  with  his  personal  life,  as  well  as
    provide new career opportunities, only to become a shameless mercenary!
     How much trust and respect does he think he has gained for himself and
    those around him?  It is unlikely that the Gamma Group is going to  lay
    down and play dead!  Does a  good  reputation  count  in  the  business
    world?

7.    Ralph should not have allowed himself to be so  easily  influenced  by
    his wife.  It is high time for Ralph to get rid of Karla!

8.    The Gamma Omaha office staff knew of Ralph’s intentions.   They  could
    contact him directly individually,  if  they  wished,  without  Karla’s
    intervention.

9.    In my opinion, Ralph, his wife, Dirk and Dorph are about as  unethical
    as most managers I have seen in my technical life.  Unfortunately, they
    have become the rule, not the exception.

Epilogue
As it turns out, the Gamma Group did not take the situation lying down.   It
determined that since Ralph’s actions in taking virtually the  entire  Gamma
staff with him to Compass within a very short period of time  (a  week)  had
ruined Gamma’s opportunity to sustain business at its  current  level,  such
action was illegal.  Gamma was also able to establish that Ralph  had  acted
with the knowledge  and  assistance  of  Dirk  Wheeler  and  others  in  the
corporate management at Compass.

As a result, Gamma brought suit  against  Compass  and  against  Ralph  Horn
separately, each for $1.4 million, which was the estimated cost to Gamma  to
recover their lost business, hire and train new employees  and  redevelop  a
comparable backlog of business.  After several  months  of  negotiations,  a
settlement was reach wherein Compass agreed to pay Gamma $700,000  in  cash.
Gamma did not press the suit against Ralph Horn individually.

Subsequently, Dirk Wheeler’s involvement with Compass as  the  president  of
the new subsidiary evaporated.  Also, after a year or two Ralph Horn was  no
longer employed with Compass, and eventually went into limited  practice  by
himself, without much real success.
