
                     The Leaning Tower: A Timely Dilemma
                                 (Case 1001)

The mission of the National Institute for Engineering Ethics  (NIEE)  is  to
promote ethics in engineering practice  and  education.   One  component  of
NIEE  is  the  Applied  Ethics  in  Professional  Practice  (AEPP)  program,
providing free engineering  ethics  cases  for  educational  purposes.   The
following case may be reprinted if it is provided  free  of  charge  to  the
engineer or  student.   Written  permission  is  required  if  the  case  is
reprinted for resale.  For more cases and other NIEE  Products  &  Services,
contact  the  National  Institute  for  Engineering   Ethics,   Texas   Tech
University, www.niee.org..  (All reprints must contain these statements)

The Case:
A medium-sized town in the Northeast derived the bulk of  the  local  income
years ago from shoes manufactured in  an  extensive  mill  facility  on  the
banks of the river running through the town.  The mill had  originally  been
located on this site in order to use  water  power  as  the  primary  energy
source for running the  mill  equipment  through  a  vast  array  of  belts,
pulleys  and  reduction  gears.   However,  because  of  the  site  location
adjacent to the river, the  soils  tended  to  be  loose  and/or  moderately
compressible,  requiring  deep  foundations  for  heavier  portions  of  the
structures.

One of the most prominent mill structures was the original tower  which  was
in excess of 15 stories in height, and over the years the  large  clocks  on
all four sides of the tower became the standard reference for  correct  time
in the local community, even after the mill became defunct and lay idle  for
more than 35 years.  Recently however, the region has realized an  increased
growth due to a demand for computer  software  development  for  industrial,
medical and personal uses.  MegaBite Unlimited, a nationally known  computer
software development firm, surveyed a number  of  sites  in  the  state  and
decided that because of the semi-rural atmosphere of the  town,  the  above-
average educational background of most of the residents and  the  attractive
tax incentives offered by the local improvement  board,  they  would  design
and build a new corporate facility in the town.

The prime site for the new facility was the abandoned mill and clock  tower.
 Since the mill buildings had been left without maintenance for such a  long
period, it was decided to demolish them and build  an  efficiently  designed
complex of structures which would  complement  the  colonial  decor  of  the
area.  The local planning  commission  concurred  with  this  decision,  but
insisted that the original 15-plus  story  clock  tower  be  retained  as  a
symbol of the prosperity the town once enjoyed,  and  would  now  experience
again.

During the design  of  the  new  facility,  MegaBite  Unlimited’s  architect
retained I. B. Stout, a structural engineer from a nearby city,  to  do  the
structural engineering and design such systems as might be necessary  during
demolition of the old structures in order to protect the  old  clock  tower,
if necessary.  Stout’s review of  the  available  records  showed  that  the
heavy clock tower was supported on a 48-foot square mat at a depth of  about
18 feet below ground surface, and the mat in turn was  supported  on  wooden
piles driven to some depth below the  water  table  to  pick  up  additional
support in the underlying soils.  Based on this information, Stout  designed
a shallow retaining system for support of the sides of the excavation  which
would occur during demolition of the adjacent mill  buildings  approximately
50 feet away.

The plans and specifications for the demolition were completed,  along  with
the  design  documents  for  the  proposed  new  facility,   advertised   to
contractors for bid, and the job was let to Colonial  Construction  Company,
a general construction contractor in business for more than 60 years in  the
local  area.   Since  Colonial  had  the  necessary  heavy  equipment,  they
proceeded with the demolition work  as  one  of  the  first  stages  of  the
project.  About  the  time  that  the  demolition  excavation  had  come  to
approximately 100 feet from the old clock tower,  one  of  the  construction
crew noted that the tower seemed a bit out of plumb, but thought  little  of
it, since the tower was so  old.   However,  as  the  excavation  progressed
closer to the tower, it became apparent that the tower  was  tilting  at  an
increasing rate, and toward the demolition excavation.
Colonial stopped work over a weekend to consider what steps, if any,  should
be taken with regard to the clock tower.  Upon  returning  to  the  site  on
Monday morning, new survey measurements indicated that the tilt at  the  top
of the tower had increased to six inches.  At that point Colonial called  W.
E. Holdem, Inc., a specialty ground modification  subcontractor,  and  asked
for their assistance in correcting the  situation  so  that  the  demolition
could  be  completed  to  the  extent  originally  planned.   Realizing  the
seriousness of the problem, Holdem in turn called  in  Jonathan  Turnbuckle,
an engineering consultant in the Midwest who  had  an  excellent  reputation
for coming up with  innovative,  cost-effective  solutions  to  construction
problems requiring ground modification.  Holdem knew of  Turnbuckle  because
they had worked together on a number  of  projects  over  the  past  several
years in other areas of the country.

Turnbuckle was quick to respond; visited the  site;  assessed  the  problem;
devised a solution with a reasonable chance of success; conferred  with  the
architect, I. B. Stout, the architect’s  geotechnical  engineer,  MegaBite’s
representatives and  the  town’s  building  officials  and  the  mayor,  and
explained the solution.  He also made  recommendations  for  standby  cranes
and other safety precautions should it not  be  possible  to  implement  the
proposed ground modification scheme in time to  save  the  clock  tower  and
avert potential property damage and possible personal injury.

The  entire  group  cooperated  in  expediting  the  standby  equipment  and
procedures. Holdem mobilized on the site within two days and  initiated  the
remediation procedure devised by  Turnbuckle,  successfully  continuing  the
process and averting the collapse of the clock tower.  It took a  period  of
about 70 days to continue the process  until  the  adjacent  demolition  was
completed and the excavation backfilled, with  constant  monitoring  on  the
site and analyses being required for at least the first 45  days.   No  one,
including I. B. Stout whose original  design  had  allowed  the  problem  to
occur, was sued.

About three weeks or so after the remediation  procedure  was  initiated  by
Holdem, Inc., Jonathan Turnbuckle realized that since the  solution  he  had
devised was an engineering design, he should have permission to practice  in
the state, if only for a temporary period.  He then  contacted  the  state’s
Board of Registration for Engineers and Surveyors,  requesting  a  temporary
engineering license.  He was told by the Board that although many states  do
have a provision for such a temporary or  short-term  permit  for  engineers
licensed in other states, this particular state had no  such  provision  and
he would have to make a full,  formal  application  for  registration  as  a
professional engineer in the state.

Turnbuckle  obtained  the  necessary  forms,  filled  them  out   (including
references to the professional  engineering  registrations  he  held  in  17
other states), and turned them in to the Board  within  a  couple  of  days.
Approximately  three  months  after  the  remedial  construction  had   been
completed and the clock tower saved, he received notice  of  his  acceptance
by the Board as a registered professional engineer  by  reciprocity.   Since
the project was complete as far as Turnbuckle  and  Holdem  were  concerned,
they each went on to other projects in other areas.

Recently, Turnbuckle has received a registered letter from the  state  Board
of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors notifying  him
that I. B. Stout, the structural engineer  for  the  MegaBite  project,  has
filed a formal complaint against him for practicing as  an  engineer  during
the time of the clock  tower  incident  without  a  license  in  the  state.
Furthermore, Turnbuckle is advised that  Stout  is  prepared  to  carry  the
matter to court, where Stout intends to sue  Turnbuckle  for  a  substantial
sum of money, claiming that too many out-of-state engineers do  designs  for
projects within the state without  being  licensed,  and  that  practice  is
financially detrimental to Stout and the survival of his practice.

Is Turnbuckle at fault for not having a professional engineer’s  license  in
the  state  during  the  design  and  implementation  of  the  clock   tower
remediation?  What should he do, or have done?

Alternate Approaches and Survey Results for “The  Leaning  Tower,  A  Timely
Dilemma” (Case 1001):
1.    Realizing that he was not registered in the state,  Turnbuckle  should
   have declined the request to devise a remedy for the  potential  imminent
   collapse of the clock tower right away.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  6%

2.    Before accepting the assignment, Turnbuckle should have contacted  the
   Board of Registration for Engineers and Surveyors to request a  temporary
   license.  Upon learning that the state  had  no  provisions  for  such  a
   temporary license, and realizing that he would in fact  be  providing  an
   engineering design without a license should he continue, he  should  have
   declined the assignment.  Colonial Construction and W.  E.  Holdem  could
   have found someone else who was a registered engineer  in  the  state  to
   come up with a design to save the clock tower.  In any event, the  matter
   would be out of Turnbuckle's hands, since he would be complying with  the
   legal requirements of the state.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  30%

   3. By placing the health, safety and welfare of the public (NSPE Code  of
   Ethics for Engineers) above the strict legal requirements of the Board of
   Registration, Turnbuckle should be supported for the action he took.   In
   addition, he did make application for a temporary license in good  faith,
   and should not be held responsible for the fact that  the  Board  had  no
   official mechanism through which to grant him a license, even  though  he
   was registered as a professional engineer in 17 other states.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  64%


Forum Comments from Respondents
1.     I  firmly  believe  that  all  current  registration  programs   need
   reevaluating.  In my opinion, all  disciplines  should  have  a  national
   registration, much like AIPG.  Once registered  through  a  state  board,
   individuals should be allowed to practice in all states in  the  US.   At
   present, state boards have too much power and  in  some  instances  abuse
   that power for their own gain.  The actions taken against Turnbuckle  are
   an example of protectionism.  I. B. Stout did not adequately plan out his
   portion of the project and should have been investigated to determine  if
   he was negligent in his appraisal of the situation.  In such  a  case  as
   this, a national certification with reciprocity would have eliminated the
   protectionism and in-fighting.

2.    The owner and the architect should have brought I. B. Stout  into  the
   process as soon as the problem was noted.  As a  consequence,  Turnbuckle
   could have been brought in by Stout  as  an  advisor,  with  Stout  being
   ultimately responsible for the design.

3.    While solution #3 is ethically the correct  answer,  Turnbuckle  could
   have worked closely as a consultant with a qualified engineer  registered
   in the state, who would in turn provide the final design recommendations,
   although the final design could therefore be somewhat different than that
   proposed by Turnbuckle.  Turnbuckle's change in  role  from  designer  to
   consultant is (1) not ethically necessary; (2) not necessary  to  provide
   an adequate  design;  and  (3)  more  costly.   However,  it  does  allow
   Turnbuckle's vast successful experience to be utilized, is legal, and  is
   ethical.

4.     If  Turnbuckle  was  required  to  sign  his  name  as  a  registered
   professional engineer in the state, his contribution to  the  engineering
   problem can be viewed as only consulting advice.  Therefore there  is  no
   legal liability basis upon which to sue.

5.    When Turnbuckle was first contacted by the contractor, he should  have
   referred to the  chart  in  the  new  book  produced  by  NSPE  entitled,
   "Engineering Licensure Laws: A State-by-State Summary and Analysis" (NSPE
   Pub. No. 2015), which would have told him that  he  cannot  apply  for  a
   temporary license in that state.  As a result, he  could  have  told  the
   prospective client that other arrangements would have to be made  due  to
   the registration laws in that state.


Epilogue
In fact, none of the design consultants  associated  with  the  project  was
willing to become involved with the remediation of the problem, even  though
it was shown that it was not physically possible to construct  the  original
design.  Despite his timely response and  recommendations  which  averted  a
real disaster, Turnbuckle was subsequently fined $500 by the State Board  of
Registration.  In addition, he was required by law to  notify  each  of  the
other 17 states in which he holds professional engineering licenses  of  the
action  take  against  him.   Having  done  that,  only  two  state   boards
acknowledged receipt of the information.  In the interim, I.  B.  Stout  has
discontinued his pursuit of monetary relief  through  court  action  against
Turnbuckle.


