
                             Ye Olde Water Main
                                 (Case 1033)


The mission of the National Institute for Engineering Ethics  (NIEE)  is  to
promote ethics in engineering practice  and  education.   One  component  of
NIEE  is  the  Applied  Ethics  in  Professional  Practice  (AEPP)  program,
providing free engineering  ethics  cases  for  educational  purposes.   The
following case may be reprinted if it is provided  free  of  charge  to  the
engineer or  student.   Written  permission  is  required  if  the  case  is
reprinted for resale.  For more cases and other NIEE  Products  &  Services,
contact  the  National  Institute  for  Engineering   Ethics,   Texas   Tech
University, www.niee.org..  (All reprints must contain these statements)

The Case:
Shadyvale, a picturesque town  in  upstate  New  England,  is  having  water
problems.  Three years ago an engineering consultant issued a  report  which
stated, among other things, that the existing water main  in  Shadyvale  was
generally in good condition but was extremely old.  Further, the water  main
no longer is large enough for all of  the  properties  served.   Since  that
time, the Town Selectmen have been trying to  secure  the  funds  needed  to
replace the old main with a new main of  larger  diameter,  but  they  still
cannot afford to do so.

However, the State Department of Transportation (DOT) is planning a  highway
reconstruction  project  in  Shadyvale.   Warren,  a  senior  planning   and
programming engineer, is  the  senior  DOT  engineer  responsible  for  this
project.  Although he now lives in the Capitol City,  Warren  was  born  and
raised in a small village not far from Shadyvale, next door to  his  boyhood
friend, Earnest “Red”  Anderson.   With  a  twinge  of  nostalgia  and  fond
memories of a more peaceful time, Warren confidently delegates  the  project
to one of his subordinates, Dianne, a young engineer  intern  about  to  sit
for the PE exam.

Dianne is well liked, highly competent, and by all indications, will go  far
in the Department.  As per standard practice, Dianne  initiates  the  design
layout for the Shadyvale  project  to  avoid  conflicts  with  the  existing
utilities, including the old water main.  She  understands  that  State  DOT
policy unambiguously requires that only unavoidable utility  conflicts  will
be paid for as part of highway projects and that other utility  work  is  to
be  considered  as  a  betterment  that  must  be  paid  for  by  the  local
municipality.  This is quite fresh on her mind, since due to a  downturn  in
the State’s economy, several layoffs have occurred in the State  government,
and recent memos have repeatedly emphasized fiscal belt-tightening.

With the design at about 30 percent completion,  Dianne  submits  a  set  of
drawings to Warren for his review and comment.  She also recommends  a  site
visit to observe the route, tie down several details,  and  resolve  various
design issues.  On the appointed morning, Warren and Dianne secure  a  State
vehicle and make the very pleasant drive to Shadyvale.  The  stress  of  the
city  fades  with  each  mile  as  they  drive  through  some  of  the  most
picturesque scenery in the State.

“I’ll definitely have to bring the wife  back  in  September  to  enjoy  the
foliage,”  muses  Warren  to  himself  as  they  drive  into  town.   Shops,
restaurants, and even the local garage still have that  old-town  feel.   As
expected, it is a wonderful day in the field, and Dianne busily gathers  the
information she needs to take the  drawings  to  the  next  level.   In  the
meantime, Warren  takes  the  opportunity  to  explore  the  town.   To  his
pleasant surprise, he learns that his friend, Red Anderson, still  lives  in
Shadyvale, and in fact is the senior Town Selectman.

Upon learning of Warren’s being in Shadyvale, Red invites Warren and  Dianne
to lunch at one of the local cafes.  In  addition  to  catching  up  on  old
times, Red recounts Shadyvale’s water main problem and  how  the  town  just
sees no way to get together the kind of money needed  for  such  a  project.
Dianne is well aware of the location of this water main – she  knows  Warren
is too – she made a conscious decision to design around it.  But neither  of
them says anything, not wanting to spoil such a  friendly  visit.   After  a
good meal, good conversation, and plans for Warren and Red to  get  together
in the near future, Warren and Dianne depart from Shadyvale.

On the way back to Department headquarters, Dianne comments to Warren  about
how, in view of their conversation with Red,  she  feels  disappointed  that
she must align the new closed  drainage  system  for  this  project  on  the
opposite side of the road from the old water main.  The facts are, were  the
proposed drainage system to impact the existing  water  main,  it  could  be
dealt with simply as an added share  to  the  Engineer's  Estimate  for  the
Town's cost, and Shadyvale would only be responsible for the  difference  in
price between the size of the  now-impacted  existing  water  main  and  the
proposed larger size (about $25,000), rather than for all of the water  main
work (over $350,000).  “It’s just too bad,” she sighed.

Warren  had  been  silent,  listening  to  Dianne’s  comments  and  line  of
reasoning.  After she finished her thought, just as they were  pulling  into
DOT headquarters, Warren looked directly at Dianne  and  stated  in  an  odd
sort of way, “Yes, the citizens of Shadyvale are  really  fine  people,  and
they deserve the best the State DOT can offer.  I want you to  do  a  really
thorough job on the layout, and I’ll back you 100 percent.”  Then,  as  they
were getting out of the car, Warren added, “By  the  way,  Dianne,  you  had
mentioned that you were going to send  me  a  reference  form  for  your  PE
license.  Please get that to me and I’ll complete it right away.”

It is now the  next  morning.   Dianne  is  at  her  desk,  looking  at  the
Shadyvale drawings.  It seems obvious to her based on  Warren’s  clandestine
remark that he wants her to change the design so that Shadyvale’s old  water
main is impacted, thus requiring the State DOT to bear most of the  cost  of
replacing it.  This could be justified  easily  enough,  and  no  subsequent
reviewer would question the issue if Warren signs off on this as he says  he
will.  After all, it is not like Warren is asking her to embezzle funds  for
personal use or anything.  But Dianne knows this action  is  not  consistent
with DOT  policy.   A  voice  inside  screams,  “What  about  your  ethics?”
Immediately  another  voice   replies,   “What   about   your   PE   license
recommendation  from  Warren?”   Yet  another  pipes  up,  “What  about  the
deserving citizens of Shadyvale?” And on it goes.

How should Dianne proceed with this matter?


Alternate Approaches and Survey Results  for  “Ye  Olde  Water  Main”  (Case
1033)
 1. Go along to get along, compliantly.  Dianne should do what Warren wants
    – not rock the boat.  She is getting her marching orders  from  Warren,
    she is under his  direct  supervision,  and  she  should  embrace  this
    opportunity to learn from him how to handle these types of  situations.


Percentage of votes agreeing: 2%

 2. Go along to get  along,  cautiously.   Dianne  should  follow  Warren’s
    apparent hint and design the reconstruction project so that  the  water
    line is replaced. If she feels  that  Warren  cannot  be  trusted,  she
    should keep records of conversations, meetings and review  comments  by
    him.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 5%

 3. Share the wealth, generously.  Adding the water  main  to  the  highway
    project is a "win-win" for everyone  involved.   The  increase  in  the
    State  project  costs  are  negligible  while   building   considerable
    community good will.  Shadyvale will obtain plenty of clean water at an
    affordable cost, Warren will fulfill his sense of hometown  obligation,
    and Dianne will receive the favorable PE recommendation she seeks.   It
    is after all the responsibility of  a  professional  engineer  to  look
    beyond polices and seek the best solution to every problem.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 6%

 4. Take refuge in ambiguity, innocently.  Dianne should proceed to develop
    the plans as per her understanding of DOT policy,  pretending  to  have
    not picked up on Warren’s subtle “hint” to move the water line.  In her
    transmittal memo to Warren, Dianne should take pains to point  out  how
    she has complied with his request to be very  thorough  in  her  design
    work on this project.  This puts the issue squarely in Warren’s  court.


      Percentage of votes agreeing: 5%

 5. Straddle the fence, technically.  Dianne is not a decision  maker,  but
    she does have the opportunity to prepare and present  two  plans.   One
    plan should follow the letter of  the  DOT  directive  and  the  second
    should follow a "cost-share" approach to  include  replacement  of  the
    water main.  Since Warren seems very  interested  in  influencing  this
    project, offer him the opportunity to recommend the project to be  sent
    forward.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 21%

 6. Straddle the fence, politically.  Don’t let policy stand in the way  of
    common sense. Since Shadyvale will benefit if the design is prepared in
    a certain way,  there  may  be  someone  from  the  Selectmen  who  has
    influence in certain circles and could  convince  someone  on  the  DOT
    board to grant a variance  to  the  policy  in  this  case.  Maybe  the
    Selectmen could ante up funds that would increase the town’s  share  of
    the  water  line  replacement  cost  which  would  justify  the  policy
    variance. Dianne  should  consult  with  Warren  on  this  approach  to
    negotiate a win-win solution and efficient expenditure of public funds.


      Percentage of votes agreeing: 14%

 7. Face the facts, squarely.  Dianne should consult with Warren to clarify
    his intentions. His statement, made as they were  getting  out  of  the
    car, could be interpreted to mean either design in accordance with  DOT
    regulations and policy, or prepare the design to cause  replacement  of
    the old water main.  If he is indeed asking her to ignore  DOT  policy,
    Dianne should talk with Warren about her concerns regarding moving  the
    alignment and explain the reasons that this is a bad idea  and  try  to
    talk him out of doing this.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 26

 8. Agree to disagree, cordially.  Dianne should ask to be removed from the
    project – she should make it clear to Warren that she would not be able
    in good conscience to do what he has asked, and point out  that  it  is
    within Warren’s prerogative to engineer the alignment  change  himself,
    or direct someone else to make the alignment change.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 7%

 9. Adhere to policy, strictly.  Dianne has clear guidance from the DOT  to
    minimize all costs to the State.  This guidance is fair, causes no real
    harm to the people of Shadyvale, and does not violate the ASCE Code  of
    Ethics.  There is no reason, other  than  her  concern  about  possibly
    losing a favorable PE recommendation, for Dianne to not follow the  DOT
    directive.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 13%

10. Blow the whistle, loudly.  Dianne should flatly refuse  to  change  the
    alignment –  Warren  is  asking  her  to  do  something  unethical  and
    something that will cost the DOT more than it should. She should simply
    say she cannot do this and put the  alignment  in  the  best  location.
    Further, she should go over Warren’s head to his  boss  and  point  out
    that he is encouraging her to violate DOT policy.
      Percentage of votes agreeing: 2%


Forum Comments from Respondents
 1. Warren's comments  could  be  taken  either  way.  If  Warren  wants  a
    violation of DOT policy, Dianne could take option 5 and force Warren to
    take responsibility for the change in alignment. If he does  so,  Diane
    can go along with this, recognizing that Warren is the senior  engineer
    and has the ultimate responsibility for the design.  Or,  Dianne  could
    blow the whistle. If she blows the whistle she could do it  loudly  and
    publicly, or she could do it quietly by leaking a copy of the  decision
    memo to someone more senior than Warren or  outside  the  DOT.   Either
    way, Dianne should  look  into  getting  a  different  person  for  her
    reference for her PE license.

 2. Dianne is aware that, given the State’s tight financial situation,  the
    decision to alter the plans to please Warren could  result  in  someone
    else in the DOT getting laid off. There are plenty of other reasons  to
    adhere to DOT policy, but I feel that this is the major one.

 3. Instead of keeping this a big  secret,  Dianne  should  ask  Warren  to
    discuss this  situation  openly  with  DOT  and  Shadyvale  to  see  if
    something can be worked out.  Dianne should take a  proactive  approach
    to  the  problem,  without  trying  to  draw   attention   to   certain
    individuals.  If the DOT is willing to work with Shadyvale, great.   If
    the situation is treated as a secret then it is dishonest.

 4. I would not mind if my gas tax helped a  few  people  get  some  needed
    clean water.

 5. In this case, I  believe  Dianne  should  ask  Warren  to  clarify  his
    intentions.   By  doing  what  he  wants,  she   will   save   her   PE
    recommendation.  This is against policy,  but  sometimes  you  have  to
    stray from what is mandated.  No rule or law is absolute; there are and
    will always be exceptions  and  under  varying  circumstances  what  is
    “right” may  not  agree  with  regulations.   As  for  the  money,  the
    residents of Shadyvale are going to pay about the  same  amount  either
    directly or indirectly.  The funds  necessary  for  carrying  out  such
    projects come from the people and it will all even out in the end.

 6. Option 3 is preferred because everyone is winning here.  Shadyvale will
    benefit from the project and the DOT will  not  lose  much.   The  most
    important thing is that the project will be done.

 7. It seems that if Warren really wants Dianne to bend the rules  for  the
    project he should be willing to do the same.  She gives him two  plans,
    one of them is what he wants, the other one is more reasonable.   Leave
    it up to Warren whether or not coffee  with  an  old  friend  justifies
    $350,000 worth of added costs for a starved state budget.  If he  wants
    to bend the rules, Dianne can do her job but leave  the  responsibility
    of the choice where it belongs, with Warren.

 8. Dianne should face the facts squarely, analyze the pro's and  con's  of
    the alignment options and let Warren decide.  Warren is the responsible
    engineer and he owes Dianne clear guidance.   Dianne  owes  Warren  her
    best summation of the issues and impacts of the two alignment  options.
    Written DOT policies and project  policies  may  differ  on  the  finer
    points and there are several possible reasons to replace the water main
    now; for  instance,  possible  disruption  of  the  water  main  during
    construction, protection of the investment in new pavement by replacing
    utilities now, ease of permitting, etc.  There  is  the  potential  for
    joint benefit with cost sharing to be negotiated.

 9. I feel that Option 6 is the best course of action. If I had to  be  one
    of the people involved in this problem, I would  want  to  be  able  to
    reach an agreement in such a way as to benefit everyone. For  the  same
    reason, if this were in the newspapers it would make everyone look like
    they did their part and the project was a joint effort.

10. Ethics should not be pushed aside just to save money, even if it is  to
    help out a  town  or  other  organization.   There  is  always  another
    solution to help people out.

11. Dianne should talk with Warren and  tell  him  her  concerns.   If  the
    project cannot be done in accordance with DOT policy then Dianne should
    request to be removed from the project.

Comments from Board of Review Members

1.    Options for Dianne:
      Option One:
      Dianne asks Warren for an  opportunity  to  discuss  comments  of  the
      preceding day.  Warren says, “Sure. What’s on your mind?”
      Dianne says, “Could we step into your office?”
      Warren answers, “Sure.”
      Dianne clears her throat and says, with some hesitancy, “What is  your
      expectation of what a “really thorough job” ought  to  yield  for  our
      project layout, especially regarding the routing  of  the  closed-pipe
      drainage system? You’ve had a lot more experience than  I  in  how  to
      deal with the type of issues we talked  about,  yesterday.  Could  you
      provide me provide me some written notes and mark up the  drawings  of
      the 30% design I submitted last week? That would be really helpful and
      could save me from overrunning my budgeted design hours.”
      Warren says, “No problem. I’ll get them to you this afternoon.”
      Later that day, after Dianne had  finished  her  brown-bag  lunch  and
      returned to her windowless office from the “staff” picnic table,  just
      outside  her  office  there  sat  the  rolled-up  drawings   and   her
      “Preliminary Design” brief.  There  was  a  big  yellow  Post-It  Note
      saying, “Looks great! Proceed with 50% Design for review on  September
      15th. W” The note bore no date.
      On a standard Department Intra-Office Memorandum  form,  Dianne  wrote
      out, “Warren, In accordance with the instructions you returned, today,
      with the “30% Design” package, I will  proceed  with  the  50%  Design
      drawings and specifications for your review on  September  15th.”  She
      dated and signed the memo. She stuck Warren’s yellow note on her  memo
      and photocopied it. Then after removing the note, she put her memo  in
      the mail cart. She then made photocopies of Warren’s note stuck on the
      cover sheets of her Preliminary Design report and drawings  and  filed
      the copies in the lockable center drawer of her desk.
      About  3:30  PM,  she  peddled  her  10-speed  home,  warned  up  some
      leftovers, wrote out a check for the  third  payment  of  her  college
      tuition loan, and leafed through  her  Advanced  Highway  Design  text
      while pondering the next forty years of her life.

      Option Two:
      Dianne logs onto Monster.com

2.    Dianne should study  all  the  reasonable  options  of  designing  the
    project – including cost estimates  and  other  related  factors.   Her
    decision should be based on the facts she develops.  She should prepare
    a   summary   report   of   her   investigations,    conclusions    and
    recommendations,  and  she  should  review  the  report  with   Warren.
    Assuming she concludes that  the  drainage  system  should  be  on  the
    opposite side from the water mains, she should  so  advise  Warren  and
    explain how she reached her conclusion.  Warren  has  several  options:
    (1) agree with  Dianne’s  conclusions  and  recommendations,  (2)  show
    deficiencies in her  approach,  or  (3)  instruct  her  to  change  her
    conclusions and recommendations.  On the assumption  that  Warren  will
    find deficiencies in her  approach,  if  Dianne  agrees  with  Warren’s
    concerns about deficiencies and this changes the conclusion, she should
    make the change to her design.  If she does not agree with Warren, then
    she should not make the change in her conclusions and  recommendations.
    If Warren instructs  her  to  change  her  recommendation,  she  should
    decline and offer the let Warren submit the project over his signature.
     Dianne should not change her conclusions and recommendations that  are
    not  supported  by  the  facts  she  develops.   She  has  the  ethical
    responsibility to base her recommendations on her  engineering  studies
    even if it may jeopardize her receiving a favorable recommendation  for
    the P.E. license.  Warren, hopefully, will do  the  ethical  thing  and
    provide an appropriate reference for the license.

