
                          Water, Water Everywhere…
                                 (Case 1014)

The mission of the National Institute for Engineering Ethics  (NIEE)  is  to
promote ethics in engineering practice  and  education.   One  component  of
NIEE  is  the  Applied  Ethics  in  Professional  Practice  (AEPP)  program,
providing free engineering  ethics  cases  for  educational  purposes.   The
following case may be reprinted if it is provided  free  of  charge  to  the
engineer or  student.   Written  permission  is  required  if  the  case  is
reprinted for resale.  For more cases and other NIEE  Products  &  Services,
contact  the  National  Institute  for  Engineering   Ethics,   Texas   Tech
University, www.niee.org..  (All reprints must contain these statements)

The Case:
Roger Champion is a young engineer who received his  Master  of  Science  in
Engineering degree two years  ago  and  is  now  working  for  a  consulting
engineering firm that proudly states that it has clients in both the  public
and private sectors. The firm believes that they are  capable  of  providing
excellent service to both sectors  and  that  this  market-diverse  strategy
enhances their services and engineering designs, as well as  providing  more
protection for the firm against unforeseen changes in  the  economy.   As  a
result, the firm has two operating vice presidents; one for  private  sector
clients and one for public works clients.

Roger has been assigned to perform  hydrologic  and  hydraulic  computations
and analyses for a sizable project as part of a contract the firm  has  with
the Downing  Flood  Control  District.   This  project  is  subdivided  into
several significant phases, and he is working on  the  first  phase  at  the
present time.  Roger’s responsibilities focus on the impacts of large  scale
upstream  development  and  the  potential  resultant  adverse  effects   on
existing  flood  control  problems  downstream.   More   specifically,   the
information he is developing will eventually be used to evaluate a  citizen-
developed  concept  for  a  regional  stormwater  detention  basin  and   an
ancillary recreational  park  to  provide  mitigation  for  the  anticipated
increases  in  runoff  from  the  upstream  development,  which  are  to  be
determined from the several phases of the study.

While he is working on this first phase of the project, Frank  Bullock,  the
firm’s  vice  president  for  private  sector   business   development,   is
approached by a number of companies to determine the status  of  the  study,
what information has been developed and what the firm’s recommendations  are
likely to be.  Because of the number and frequency of  these  requests,  and
the obvious opportunity for establishing closer relations with previous  and
prospective private clients, Frank approaches Roger and requests a draft  of
the first phase report before it is finalized and submitted to  the  Downing
Flood Control District.

As soon as the draft is prepared, Roger  sends  a  copy  to  Frank  for  his
review and comment.  Receiving suggestions and comments from  his  boss  and
other reviewers in the firm a couple of weeks later,  but  not  from  Frank,
Roger finalizes the report.  Prior to actually having the  report  delivered
to the client, Roger approaches his boss,  Bill  Mason,  and  expresses  his
uneasiness about having provided Frank Bullock with a draft of  the  report,
since he is not sure what use Frank will make of it.  Roger  also  indicates
to Bill that he recognizes that the information will be made public once  it
is reviewed by the flood control district, however he is a bit disturbed  by
the timing of these events.

Bill thanks Roger for his concern about the propriety of the situation,  but
assures Roger that it is nothing more than a matter  of  timing,  since  the
information will be made public within a few weeks anyway.   In  fact,  this
is not an unusual situation, and it is done all the time, not only  by  this
firm,  but  by  others  under  similar  circumstances.   It  is  viewed   as
cooperating with the public.

What, if anything, should Roger do, now and in the future?


Alternate Approaches and Survey Results for “Water, Water Everywhere”  (Case
1014)
1.    He should do nothing.  Roger is young, inexperienced and  unaccustomed
     to consulting engineering practice.  He does not understand  that  this
     is the way business is done in these circumstances.  It is an  accepted
     practice  and  everyone  understands  it,  as  his  boss,  Bill   Mason
     explained.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  4%

2.    He should play dumb and ask Frank Bullock  for  his  comments  on  the
     report, since he wanted to review the draft copy.  Ask him what use  he
     is making of the draft report and if he has  anything  constructive  to
     add to the report from an engineering standpoint.  Perhaps Frank really
     did want to provide technical assistance.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  11%

3.    He should explain his concerns over an after-work beer with  a  couple
     of friends in other engineering firms in town to see if this really  is
     a common and accepted practice.  If it is not  accepted  practice,  ask
     for their advice about what he  should  do  in  this  circumstance,  if
     anything.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  4%

4.    He should call his contact at the client's office (the  Downing  Flood
     Control District) and discuss the situation with them to  see  if  they
     are concerned over the possibility of  the  information  in  the  draft
     report being made available to a number of private companies before the
     final report is submitted and accepted by  the  District,  and  becomes
     public property.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  15%

5.    He should write a letter to the president of his firm, with copies  to
     both Frank Bullock and Bill Mason, simply outlining the chain of events
     without accusations of any  kind.   Let  the  president  deal  with  it
     (that's why he gets paid big bucks).
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  8%

6.    He should call a meeting within the  firm,  including  Frank  Bullock,
     Bill Mason, the president of the  firm  and  the  firm's  attorney,  to
     discuss whether it is ethical  or  unethical  for  the  company  to  be
     disseminating the contents of the  draft  report  to  others  prior  to
     submitting the final report to the Downing Flood Control District.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  18%

7.    He should make an anonymous telephone call to the local radio  station
     and/or  newspaper,  saying  that  "rumor  has  it"   that   preliminary
     information about the impacts of the proposed large development on  the
     magnitude and cost of anticipated downstream flood  control  facilities
     is being made available to  some  interested  parties,  including  real
     estate agents and developers.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  1%

8.    He  should  call  the  National  Society  for  Professional  Engineers
     (NSPE), talk with their in-house legal advisor and determine if this is
     an acceptable practice or if any laws are  being  broken,  but  do  not
     divulge the name of the firm.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  26%

9.    He should call the state's Attorney  General  office  and  set  up  an
     appointment with an attorney  for  the  state  to  discuss  the  entire
     matter.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  1%

10.   If there is incontrovertible evidence that Frank  Bullock  has  shared
     or is sharing the information in the  preliminary  draft  with  old  or
     prospective clients who stand to gain financially from the  disclosure,
     Roger should file a  complaint  with  the  Board  of  Registration  for
     Engineers in his state, since this would likely be a violation of their
     code of ethics.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  10%

11.   He should resign and move to Paraguay, or somewhere else.
      Percentage of votes agreeing:  2%


Forum Comments from Respondents
1.    Before Roger can act on anything, he needs to know if there is  really
     a problem or not.

2.    He should make sure the company knows what  he  is  doing.   Don't  go
     behind their backs.

3.    Since he has already spoken to his own  boss,  he  should  go  to  the
     firm's attorney quietly to describe his fears.  With no evidence of any
     kind to back up his fears, he should not speak out publicly and perhaps
     ruin someone's career on just suspicion.  Let the firm's attorney  take
     it from there.

4.    It is interesting that the two highest scoring  solutions  (options  3
     and 8) in this class of senior mechanical engineering students focus on
     finding out more about the appropriateness of the situation - - in  one
     case from the experts and in the other from  peers.   It  seems  clear,
     therefore, that making available the resources to help young  engineers
     resolve such questions will have an important role in raising the level
     of ethical performance.

5.    Roger  actually  has  no  evidence  of  ethical  misconduct  by  Frank
     Bullock.  There  are  potential  other  uses  of  a  draft  report  for
     understanding the district and refining  marketing  strategies  without
     handing it out to developers.

6.    The time to raise the issue was when Frank Bullock asked for  a  draft
     copy!  Nominally one would expect there to be some [internal] rules  on
     separation of public  and  private  clients  which  would  prevent  the
     information transfer.  If both clients were  private,  it  would  never
     happen; the fact that one is "public" is a red herring -  it  is  still
     insider information until the "public" entity actually makes it public.
      The possibility of making money on prior knowledge of  the  report  is
     definitely there.

7.    Timing on release of recommendations from such a study is critical  to
     all   potential   investors/developers   who   would   likely   benefit
     substantially from such information if they had it before  competitors.
     Hence, Roger's concern is legitimate.  There is the danger that  Frank,
     and possibly Bill, will benefit personally (let alone  the  benefit  to
     the company from grateful customers or potential customers)  by  having
     the pre-released information.  This is unethical generally, and, in the
     case of government contracts, illegal.

8.    Roger does not know to what use Frank put the report nor does he  know
     for sure that a violation of any ethical  practice  has  occurred.   If
     Frank did give a "preview" copy  to  his  business  associates  and  it
     contained information that could be defined as "insider information", a
     violation of ethical principles has occurred.   With  public  companies
     the SEC [Securities Exchange Commission] has rules directed to  release
     of that  information  and,  I  believe,  criminal  prosecution  can  be
     invoked.

9.    This [acknowledged practice of distributing draft  report  information
     to  the  public  without  permission  of  the  public  client]  is  not
     cooperating with the public.  This is colluding with people  who  stand
     to gain financially  by  getting  information  before  it  is  publicly
     available.  At this point Roger's boss has revealed his lack of ethical
     character.  The "it's done all the time" justification is a  huge  tip-
     off that what's being done is knowingly wrong.

10.   In the future, Roger should understand the use that will  be  made  of
     his draft work before giving copies to people in or out of his  company
     not directly associated with the project.

11.   Frank would probably say that his action wasn't ethical, it  was  just
     good business.  There is  a  fine  line  between  "good  business"  and
     unethical behavior.  If Frank used the information to contact  some  of
     his clients before the information was made public, then that  deed  is
     the same as inside trading on the stock market.  I think it is WRONG.

12.   In the future, Roger should tell Frank hat he cannot have  a  copy  of
     the report until it becomes public because it  is  still  his  client's
     [the Flood Control District's] property until that time.  The fact that
     the firm works for different clients should not  mean  that  the  rules
     change.  If Roger had passed the draft on  to  a  different  consulting
     firm before  it  was  public,  that  would  be  unethical  because  the
     information still belongs to the Flood Control  District  until  it  is
     made public.

13.   Many [engineering] contracts  have  confidentiality  clauses  in  them
     that strictly forbid discussion of the  project  findings  and  results
     with anyone outside of the firm [other than the client].  Even is there
     were no contract clause forbidding outside discussion, Roger's firm  is
     forgetting who their client is.  Roger must remind his peers and bosses
     that the Flood Control District may very  well  want  some  significant
     changes in the report, which he would have to make and could  adversely
     impact the developers.  It would put the firm in a  real  bind  if  the
     developers came back to the firm and pressured them on how  they  wrote
     the report.

