At 5:00 am EST on October 14th, the New York Post (NY Post) published an article that many politicians and news analysts would soon qualify as this election’s October surprise. In politics, October surprise refers to any newsworthy event—planned or unplanned—that has the potential to impact the outcome of the election. The Post article, “Smoking-gun email reveals how Hunter Biden introduced Ukranian Businessman to VP dad,” contains claims more captivating than even the title suggests. Citing the content of a recovered hard drive, the article alleges that Joe Biden’s son leveraged his father’s political position for personal gain. 

At 8:10 AM on the same day, a spokesperson for Facebook stated that they intended to fact-check the article and would reduce its distribution on their platform. Twitter also locked the NY Post’s account and disallowed its users from sharing links to the article on their platform, alerting users that the link had “been identified by Twitter or [Twitter’s] partners as being potentially harmful.” Not unexpectedly, backlash ensued. The common criticism levied against both companies deals with internal inconsistency. Facebook doesn’t have any clear policies permitting preemptive distribution moderation if a post is simply eligible to be fact-checked. And aren’t all posts eligible for fact-checking? And apparently, Twitter doesn’t have any third-party fact-checking partnerships at all, at least according to the editor-in-chief of PolitiFact who voiced her concerns over social media. “Has Twitter partnered with fact-checkers without telling anyone? It would be news to me.” (Poynter). 

But despite both companies’ efforts to limit its spread, the Post article attracted significant attention. Axios reported that the NY Post article received 2.59 million interactions on Facebook and Twitter during the week of its publication (83% on Facebook and 17% on Twitter). On October 20th, it became the 6th most popular news article of the month (Axios).

Using the words historic and unprecedented to describe the circumstances of the 2020 presidential election has become somewhat cliché. The sheer number of potentially false news stories exchanged online is only one of the factors informing this cliché. Although they may not have said so publicly, Facebook and Twitter’s decisions reflect the unique election-time pressure afflicting the entire journalistic and social media enterprise. How can media institutions facilitate the free flow of information and promote the truth during an election cycle shrouded in misinformation?
