Ryan Lochte’s career establishes him as one of America’s greatest swimmers. He was a two-time NCAA Swimmer of the Year, a 24-time NCAA All-American, and a 7-time NCAA champion. He won twelve Olympic swimming medals, including the second most individual swimming medals of all time in Men’s swimming. At the Summer Olympics in 2016 in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, Lochte won his final gold medal as a member of the USA Men’s 4 x 200-meter relay team.

The USA team dominated the medal count in Rio. At the conclusion of the competition, Lochte left the Olympic village to celebrate with three other USA swimmers, including one who was not yet 21 and therefore was forbidden to leave the village.

During the course of their celebration, the four became intoxicated or otherwise impaired, which led to a very unfortunate situation. As reported by The New York Times:

They asked the taxi driver who was returning them to the athletes’ village from a party to pull over at a gas station.

What happened next remains murky but involved public urination, vandalism and money changing hands between the swimmers and security guards brandishing weapons.

In Lochte’s original account, which he gave in a television interview with NBC the next morning, he said the taxi had been stopped by armed men he believed were police officers, one of whom held a gun against his head before taking cash from his wallet.

His story encapsulated the fears of Olympic visitors and the insecurities of a host city struggling with high crime and gun battles between drug gangs and the police.

After the Brazilian authorities opened their own investigation, Lochte altered his story and acknowledged that he had “overexaggerated,” but not before the events had overshadowed the accomplishments of American athletes during the second week of the Games.

The fall-out from Lochte’s “overexaggeration,” which he made in an interview with Matt Lauer on NBC television, was significant:

Much of the Brazilian population was outraged by an apparently false charge of crime and police corruption.
Much anger was expressed at the athletes’ apparent display of privilege and disdain for Brazil.
U.S. Olympic officials issued several apologies for the four athletes’ behavior.
Lochte himself issued multiple apologies, including this one:
“I wanted to apologize for my behavior last weekend—for not being more careful and candid in how I described the events of that early morning and for my role in taking the focus away from the many athletes fulfilling their dreams of participating in the Olympics.”

Lochte was charged with providing a false claim of a robbery. The charge was later dismissed on grounds that his actions didn’t rise to the level of filing a false crime report.
Lochte was accused of being a liar in many news media reports.
Lochte lost all four of his major sponsors.
Lochte was suspended by the US Olympic Committee and USA Swimming for four months.
Lochte was required to complete 20 hours of community service.
The situation became known as “LochteGate.”
In a later interview, when asked why he had “overexaggerated” what happened, Lochte responded: “I think it’s still hours after the incident and I’m not one to make excuses but I was still intoxicated. I was still going through the emotions of having a gun pulled on me. I’m human – I made a mistake and that’s something I’m going to have to live with.”
