Rick Singer was an independent college counselor who devised a "side door" method to guarantee college admissions for his clients. Traditionally, students could enter through the "front door" by meeting academic and extracurricular standards or through the "back door" by making substantial donations to the school. Singer's "side door" exploited underpaid coaches in non-revenue sports who had the authority to designate applicants as athletes, thereby prioritizing their admissions. By promising donations from parents to these sports programs or directly to the coaches, Singer could ensure a student's acceptance.

Another tactic involved manipulating standardized test scores. Singer bribed test administrators in Houston and Los Angeles. If parents could obtain special accommodations for their child, such as extra time, and arrange for the test to be taken at these locations, Singer's associates would either take the test on behalf of the student or correct answers to achieve desired scores.

Singer targeted wealthy families, playing on their insecurities and devotion to their children. He would initially provide standard counseling, advising on courses and activities, and help students select their preferred schools. Then, he would inform parents that their child had little chance of admission through conventional means but offered his "side door" as a solution.

Parents were instructed to fabricate athletic profiles, sometimes by taking photos of their child participating in a sport or even Photoshopping their child's face onto an athlete's body. They were then asked to make significant donations, some exceeding one million dollars, to Singer's foundation. Singer would funnel these funds to coaches, who would then list the student as a recruited athlete, virtually guaranteeing admission. Once enrolled, the student would claim an injury and "retire" from the sport.

Many of the parents involved were otherwise honorable individuals and loving parents. For instance, Douglas Hodge was a top executive and philanthropist; Gordie Caplan was a law firm co-managing partner who emphasized integrity; Felicity Huffman was an actor and parenting blogger; and Jane Buckingham advocated for appreciating children as they are. Despite their backgrounds, these parents engaged in fraud and bribery to secure their children's college admissions. Many had moral reservations but proceeded nonetheless. Huffman, for example, considered turning back while driving her daughter to a manipulated SAT test but ultimately continued.

Interestingly, most parents kept the cheating a secret from their children, wanting them to believe they had been admitted on their own merit.

The "Varsity Blues" scandal is the largest in college admissions history. When the FBI uncovered Singer's schemes, he was imprisoned, along with many of the involved parents, who also faced public exposure and job losses. 